The War of the Worlds

No one would have believed, in the last years 
of the nineteenth century, that human affairs 
were being watched keenly and closely by 
intelligences greater than man's and yet as 
mortal as his own ; that as men busied themselves about their affairs they were scrutinized 
and studied, perhaps almost as narrowly as a 
man with a microscope might scrutinize the 
transient creatures that swarm and multiply in 
a drop of water. With infinite complacency 
men went to and fro over this globe about 
J;heir little affairs, serene in their assurance of 
their empire over matter. It is possible that 
the infusoria under the microscope do the 
same. No one gave a thought to the older 
worlds of space as sources of human danger, or 
I thought of them only to dismiss the idea of life 
upon them as impossible or improbable. It is 
curious to recall some of the mental habits of 
those departed days. At most, terrestrial men 
fancied there might be other men upon Mars, 
perhaps inferior to themselves and ready to 
welcome a missionary enterprise. Yet, across 
the gulf of space, minds that are to our minds 
as ours are to those of the beasts that perish, 
intellects vast and cool and unsympathetic, 
regarded this earth with envious eyes, and 
slowly and surely drew their plans against 
us. And early in the twentieth century came 
the great disillusionment. 

The planet Mars, I scarcely need remind the 
reader, revolves about the sun at a mean distance of 140,000,000 miles, and the light and 
heat it receives from the sun is barely half of 
that received by this world. It must be, if the 
nebular hypothesis has any truth, older than 
our world, and long before this earth ceased to 
be molten, life upon its surface must have 
begun its course. The fact that it is scarcely oneseventh of the volume of the earth must have 
accelerated its cooling to the temperature at 
which life could begin. It has air and water, 
and all that is necessary for the support of 
animated existence. 


The Eve of the War

Yet so vain is man, and so blinded by his 
vanity, that no writer, up to the very end of the 
nineteenth century, expressed any idea that 
intelligent life might have developed there far, 
or indeed at all, beyond its earthly level. Nor 
was it generally understood that since Mars is 
older than our earth, with scarcely a quarter of 
the superficial area, and remoter from the sun, 
it necessarily follows that it is not only more 
distant from life's beginning but nearer its 
end.

The secular cooling that must some day overtake our planet has already gone far indeed 
with our neighbour. Its physical condition is 
still largely a mystery, but we know now that 
even in its equatorial region the mid-day temperature barely approaches that of our coldest 
winter. Its air is much more attenuated than 
ours, its oceans have shrunk until they cover 
but a third of its surface, and as its slow seasons 
change huge snowcaps gather and melt about 
either pole, and periodically inundate its temperate zones. That last stage of exhaustion, 
which to us is still incredibly remote, has become 
a present-day problem for the inhabitants of 
Mars. The immediate pressure of necessity 
has brightened their intellects, enlarged their 
powers, and hardened their hearts. And looking 
across space, with instruments and intelligences 
such as we have scarcely dreamt of, they 
see, at its nearest distance, only 35,000,000 of 
miles sunward of them, a morning star of hope, 
our own warmer planet, green with vegetation 
and gray with water, with a cloudy atmosphere 
eloquent of fertility, with glimpses through 
its drifting cloud-wisps of broad stretches of 
populous country and narrow navy -crowded 
seas. 

And we men, the creatures who inhabit this 
earth, must be to them at least as alien and 
lowly as are the monkeys and lemurs to us. 
The intellectual side of man already admits 
that life is an incessant struggle for existence, 
and it would seem that this too is the belief of 
the minds upon Mars. Their world is far gone 
in its cooling, and this world is still crowded 
with life, but crowded only with what they 
regard as inferior animals. To carry warfare 
sunward is indeed their only escape from the 
destruction that generation after generation 
creeps upon them. 

And before we judge of them too harshly, 
we must remember what ruthless and utter 
destruction our own species has wrought, not 
only upon animals, such as the vanished 
bison and the dodo, but upon its own inferior 
races. The Tasmanians, in spite of their 
human likeness, were entirely swept out of 
existence in a war of extermination waged 
by European immigrants, in the space of fifty 
years. Are we such apostles of mercy as to 
complain if the Martians warred in the same 
spirit? 

The Martians seem to have calculated their 
descent with amazing subtlety their mathematical learning is evidently far in excess of 
ours and to have carried out their preparations with a well-nigh perfect unanimity. Had 
our instruments permitted it, we might have 
seen the gathering trouble far back in the 
nineteenth century. Men like Schiaparelli 
watched the red planet it is odd, by-the-by, 
that for countless centuries Mars has been the 
star of war but failed to interpret the fluctuating appearances of the markings they mapped 
so well. All that time the Martians must have 
been getting ready. 

During the opposition of 1894 a great light 
was seen on the illuminated part of the disc, 
first at the Lick Observatory, then by Perrotin 
of Nice, and then by other observers. English 
readers heard of it first in the issue of Nature 
dated August 2. I am inclined to think that 
the appearance may have been the casting of 
the huge gun, the vast pit sunk into their planet, 
from which their shots were fired at us. Peculiar 
markings, as yet unexplained, were seen near 
the site of that outbreak during the next two 
oppositions. 

The storm burst upon us six years ago now. 
As Mars approached opposition, Lavelle of 
Java set the wires of the astronomical exchange 
palpitating with the amazing intelligence of a 
huge outbreak of incandescent gas upon the 
planet. It had occurred towards midnight of 
the 1 2th, and the spectroscope, to which he 
had at once resorted, indicated a mass of 
flaming gas, chiefly hydrogen, moving with an 
enormous velocity towards this earth. This 
jet of fire had become invisible about a quarter 
past twelve. He compared it to a colossal puff 
of flame, suddenly and violently squirted out of 
the planet, ' as flaming gas rushes out of a 
gun.' 

A singularly appropriate phrase it proved. 
Yet the next day there was nothing of this in 
the papers, except a little note in the Daily 
Telegraph, and the world went in ignorance of 
one of the gravest dangers that ever threatened 
the human race. I might not have heard of the 
eruption at all had I not met Ogilvy, the wellknown astronomer, at Ottershaw. He was immensely
excited at the news, and in the excess of his 
feelings invited me up to take a turn with him that
night in a scrutiny of the red planet. 

In spite of all that has happened since, I still 
remember that vigil very distinctly: the black 
and silent observatory, the shadowed lantern 
throwing a feeble glow upon the floor in the 
corner, the steady ticking of the clockwork of 
the telescope, the little slit in the roof an 
oblong profundity with the star dust streaked 
across it. Ogilvy moved about, invisible but 
audible. Looking through the telescope, one 
saw a circle of deep blue, and the little round 
planet swimming in the field. It seemed such 
a little thing, so bright and small and still, 
faintly marked with transverse stripes, and 
slightly flattened from the perfect round. But 
so little it was, so silvery warm, a pin's head of 
light T -It was as if it quivered a little, but 
really this was the telescope vibrating with the 
activity of the clockwork that kept the planet 
in view. 

As I watched, the little star seemed to grow 
larger and smaller, and to advance and recede, 
but that was simply that my eye was tired. 
Forty millions of miles it was from us more 
than 40,000,000 miles of void. Few people 
realize the immensity of vacancy in which the 
dust of the material universe swims. 

Near it in the field, I remember, were three 
little points of light, three telescopic stars 
infinitely remote, and all around it was the unfathomable darkness of empty space. You 
know how that blackness looks on a frosty starlight night. In a telescope it seems far profounder. And invisible to me, because it was 
so remote and small, flying swiftly and steadily 
towards me across that incredible distance, drawing nearer every minute by so many thousands 
of miles, came the Thing they were sending us, 
the Thing that was to bring so much struggle 
and calamity and death to the earth. I never 
dreamt of it then as I watched ; no one on 
earth dreamt of that unerring missile. 

That night, too, there was another jetting 
out of gas from the distant planet. I saw it. 
A reddish flash at the edge, the slightest projection of the outline, just as the chronometer 
struck midnight, and at that I told Ogilvy, and 
he took my place. The night was warm and I 
was thirsty, and I went, stretching my legs 
clumsily, and feeling my way in the darkness, 
to the little table where the siphon stood, while 
Ogilvy exclaimed at the streamer of gas that 
came out towards us. 


The Eve of the War 

That night another invisible missile started 
on its way to the earth from Mars, just a second 
or so under twenty-four hours after the first 
one. I remember how I sat on the table there 
in the blackness, with patches of green and 
crimson swimming before my eyes. I wished 
I had a light to smoke by, little suspecting the 
meaning of the minute gleam I had seen, and 
all that it would presently bring me. Ogilvy 
watched till one, and then gave it up, and we 
lit the lantern and walked over to his house. 
Down below in the darkness were Ottershaw 
and Chertsey, and all their hundreds of people, 
sleeping in peace. 

He was full of speculation that night about 
the condition of Mars, and scoffed at the vulgar 
idea of its having inhabitants who were signalling us. His idea was that meteorites might 
be falling in a heavy shower upon the planet, 
or that a huge volcanic explosion was in progress. He pointed out to me how unlikely it 
was that organic evolution had taken the same 
direction in the two adjacent planets. 

'The chances against anything man-like on 
Mars are a million to one,' he said. 

Hundreds of observers saw the flame that 
night and the night after, about midnight, and 
again the night after, and so for ten nights, 
a flame each night. Why the shots ceased 
after the tenth no one on earth has attempted 
to exglain. It may be the gases of the 
firing caused the Martians inconvenience. 
Dense clouds of smoke or dust, visible through 
a powerful telescope on earth as little gray, 
fluctuating patches, spread through the clearness of the planet's atmosphere, and obscured 
its more familiar features. 

Even the daily papers woke up to the disturbances at last, and popular notes appeared 
here, there, and everywhere concerning the 
volcanoes upon Mars. The serio-comic periodical Punch, I remember, made a happy use 
of it in the political cartoon. And, all unsuspected, those missiles the Martians had fired 
at us drew earthward, rushing now at a pace 
of many miles a second through the empty gulf 
of space, hour by hour and day by day, nearer 
and nearer. It seems to me now almost incredibly wonderful that, with that swift fate 
hanging over us, men could go about their 
petty concerns as they did. I remember how 
jubilant Markham was at securing a new photograph of the planet for the illustrated paper he 
edited in those days. People in these latter 
times scarcely realize the abundance and enterprise of our nineteenth-century papers. For 
my own part, I was much occupied in learning 
to ride the bicycle, and busy upon a series of 
papers discussing the probable developments of 
moral ideas as civilization progressed. 

One night (the first missile then could scarcely 
have been 10,000,000 miles away) I went for a 
walk with my wife. It was starlight, and I 
explained the Signs of the Zodiac to her, and 
pointed out Mars, a bright dot of light creeping 
zenithward, towards which so many telescopes 
were pointed. It was a warm night. Coming 
home, a party of excursionists from Chertsey 
or Isleworth passed us singing and playing 
music. There were lights in the upper 
windows of the houses as the people went 
to bed. From the railway - station in the 
distance came the sound of shunting trains, 
ringing and rumbling, softened almost into 
melody by the distance. My wife pointed out 
to me the brightness of the red, green and 
yellow signal lights, hanging in a framework 
against the sky. It seemed so safe and 
tranquil. 


The Falling Star

Then came the night of the first falling star. 
It was seen early in the morning rushing over 
Winchester eastward, a line of flame, high in 
the atmosphere. Hundreds must have seen it, 
and taken it for an ordinary falling star. Albin 
described it as leaving a greenish streak behind 
it that glowed for some seconds. Denning, our 
greatest authority on meteorites, stated that the 
height of its first appearance was about ninety 
or one hundred miles. It seemed to him that it 
fell to earth about one hundred miles east of 
him. 

I was at home at that hour and writing in 
my study, and although my French windows 
face towards Ottershaw and the blind was up 
(for I loved in those days to look up at the 
night sky), I saw nothing of it. Yet this 
strangest of all things that ever came to earth 
from outer space must have fallen while I was 
sitting there, visible to me had I only looked 
up as it passed. Some of those who saw its 
flight say it travelled with a hissing sound. I 
myself heard nothing of that. Many people 
in Berkshire, Surrey, and Middlesex must have 
seen the fall of it, and, at most, have thought 
that another meteorite had descended. No one 
seems to have troubled to look for the fallen 
mass that night. 

But very early in the morning poor Ogilvy, 
who had seen the shooting star, and who was 
persuaded that a meteorite lay somewhere on 
the common between Horsell, Ottershaw and 
Woking, rose early with the idea of finding it. 
Find it he did, soon after dawn, and not far 
from the sand-pits. An enormous hole had 
been made by the impact of the projectile, 
and the sand and gravel had been flung violently in every direction over the heath and 
heather, forming heaps visible a mile and 
a half away. The heather was on fire eastward, and a thin blue smoke rose against the 
dawn. 

The Thing itself lay almost entirely buried in 
sand, amidst the scattered splinters of a fir-tree 
it had shivered to fragments in its descent, 
The uncovered part had the appearance of a 
huge cylinder, caked over, and its outline 
softened by a thick, scaly, dun-coloured incrustation.
It had a diameter of about thirty yards. 
He approached the mass, surprised at the size 
and more so at the shape, since most meteorites 
are rounded more or less completely. It was, 
however, still so hot from its flight through the 
air as to forbid his near approach. A stirring 
noise within its cylinder he ascribed to the 
unequal cooling of its surface ; for at that time 
it had not occurred to him that it might be 
hollow. 

He remained standing at the edge of the 
pit that the thing had made for itself, staring 
at its strange appearance, astonished chiefly at 
its unusual shape and colour, and dimly perceiving even then some evidence of design in 
its arrival. The early morning was wonderfully still, and the sun, just clearing the pinetrees towards Weybridge, was already warm. 
He did not remember hearing any birds that 
morning, there was certainly no breeze stirring, 
and the only sounds were the faint movements 
from within the cindery cylinder. He was all 
alone on the common. 

Then suddenly he noticed with a start that 
some of the gray clinker, the ashy incrustation 
that covered the meteorite, was falling off the 
circular edge of the end. It was dropping off 
in flakes and raining down upon the sand. A 
large piece suddenly came off and fell with a 
sharp noise that brought his heart into his 
mouth. 

For a minute he scarcely realized what this 
meant, and, although the heat was excessive, 
he clambered down into the pit close to the 
bulk to see the thing more clearly. He fancied 
even then that the cooling of the body might 
account for this, but what disturbed that idea 
was the fact that the ash was falling only from 
the end of the cylinder. 

And then he perceived that, very slowly, the 
circular top of the cylinder was rotating on its 
body. It was such a gradual movement that 
he discovered it only through noticing that a 
black mark that had been near him five minutes 
ago was now at the other side of the circumference. Even then he scarcely understood 
what this indicated, until he heard a muffled 
grating sound and saw the black mark jerk 
forward an inch or so. Then the thing came 
upon him in a flash. The cylinder was artificial
hollow with an end that screwed out! 
Something within the cylinder was unscrewing 
the top! 
'Good heavens!' said Ogilvy. 'There's a 
man in it men in it! Half roasted to death! 
Trying to escape!' 
At once, with a quick mental leap, he linked 
the thing with the flash upon Mars. 

The thought of the confined creature was so 
dreadful to him that he forgot the heat, and 
went forward to the cylinder to help turn. But 
luckily the dull radiation arrested him before he 
could burn his hands on the still glowing metal. 
At that he stood irresolute for a moment, then 
turned, scrambled out of the pit, and set off 
running wildly into Woking. The time then 
must have been somewhere about six o'clock. 
He met a waggoner and tried to make him 
understand, but the tale he told, and his 
appearance, were so wild his hat had fallen off in 
the pit that the man simply drove on. He 
was equally unsuccessful with the potman who 
was just unlocking the doors of the publichouse by Horsell Bridge. The fellow thought 
he was a lunatic at large, and made an unsuccessful
attempt to shut him into the tap-room. 
That sobered him a little, and when he saw 
Henderson, the London journalist, in his 
garden, he called over the palings and made 
himself understood. 
' Henderson,' he called, ' you saw that shooting
star last night ?' 
' Well ?' said Henderson. 
' It's out on Horsell Common now.' 
' Good Lord !' said Henderso. ' Fallen 
meteorite ! That's good.' 
' But it's something more than a meteorite. 
It's a cylinder an artificial cylinder, man ! And 
there's something inside.' 
Henderson stood up with his spade in his 
hand. 
'What's that?' he said. He is deaf in one 
ear. 

Ogilvy told him all that he had seen. Henderson was a minute or so taking it in. Then 
he dropped his spade, snatched at his jacket, 
and came out into the road. The two men 
hurried back at once to the common, and found 
the cylinder still lying in the same position. 
But now the sounds inside had ceased, and a 
thin circle of bright metal showed between the 
top and the body of the cylinder. Air was 
either entering or escaping at the rim with a 
thin, sizzling sound. 

They listened, rapped on the scale with a 
stick, and, meeting with no response, they 
both concluded the man or men inside must 
be insensible or dead. 

Of course the two were quite unable to do 
anything. They shouted consolation and promises, and went off back to the town again to 
get help. One can imagine them, covered with 
sand, excited and disordered, running up the 
little street in the bright sunlight, just as the 
shop folks were taking down their shutters and 
people were opening their bedroom windows. 
Henderson went into the railway - station at 
once, in order to telegraph the news to London. 
The newspaper articles had prepared men's 
minds for the reception of the idea. 

By eight o'clock a number of boys and unemployed
men had already started for the 
common to see the 'dead men from Mars.' 
That was the form the story took. I heard of 
it first from my newspaper boy, about a quarter 
to nine, when I went out to get my Daily 
Chronicle. I was naturally startled, and lost 
no time in going out and across the Ottershaw 
bridge to the sand-pits. 


On Horsell Common 

I found a little crowd of perhaps twenty people 
surrounding the huge hole in which the cylinder 
lay. I have already described the appearance 
of that colossal bulk, imbedded in the ground. 
The turf and gravel about it seemed charred as 
if by a sudden explosion. No doubt its impact 
had caused a flash of fire. Henderson and 
Ogilvy were not there. I think they perceived 
that nothing was to be done for the present, 
and had gone away to breakfast at Henderson's 
house. 

There were four or five boys sitting on the 
edge of the pit, with their feet dangling, and 
amusing themselves until I stopped them by 
throwing stones at the giant mass. After I 
had spoken to them about it, they began playing 
at touch in and out of the group of bystanders. 

Among these were a couple of cyclists, a 
jobbing gardener I employed sometimes, a girl 
carrying a baby, Gregg the butcher and his 
little boy, and two or three loafers and golf 
caddies who were accustomed to hang about 
the railway - station. There was very little 
talking. Few of the common people in England had anything but the vaguest astronomical 
ideas in those days. Most of them were staring 
quietly at the big table-like end of the cylinder, 
which was still as Ogilvy and Henderson had 
left it. I fancy the popular expectation of a 
heap of charred corpses was disappointed at 
this inanimate bulk. Some went away while I 
was there, and other people came. I clambered 
into the pit and fancied I heard a faint movement
under my feet. The top had certainly ceased to rotate. 

It was only when I got thus close to it that 
the strangeness of this object was at all evident 
to me. At the first glance it was really no 
more exciting than an overturned carriage or a 
tree blown across the road. Not so much so, 
indeed. It looked like a rusty gas-float half 
buried, more than anything else in the world. 
It required a certain amount of scientific education
to perceive that the gray scale of the thing 
was no common oxide, that the yellowish-white 
metal that gleamed in the crack between the 
lid and the cylinder had an unfamiliar hue. 

' Extra-terrestrial ' had no meaning for most of 
the onlookers. 

At that time it was quite clear in my own 
mind that the Thing had come from the planet 
Mars, but I judged it improbable that it contained
any living creature. I thought the unscrewing might
be automatic. In spite of Ogilvy, I still believed
that there were men in Mars. My mind ran fancifully
on the possibilities of its containing manuscript,
on the difficulties in translation that might arise, 
whether we should find coins and models in it, 
and so forth. Yet it was a little too large for 
assurance on this idea. I felt an impatience to 
see it opened. About eleven, as nothing 
seemed happening, I walked back, full of such 
thoughts, to my home in Maybury. But I 
found it difficult to get to work upon my 
abstract investigations. 

In the afternoon the appearance of the 
common had altered very much. The early 
editions of the evening papers had startled 
London with enormous headlines : 

' A message received from Mars 
' REMARKABLE STORY FROM WOKING,' 

and so forth. In addition, Ogilvy's wire to the 
 

Astronomical Exchange had roused every 
observatory in the three kingdoms. 

There were half a dozen flys or more from 
the Woking station standing in the road by the 
sand-pits, a basket chaise from Chobham, and a 
rather lordly carriage. Besides that, there was 
quite a heap of bicycles. In addition, a large 
number of people must have walked, in spite of 
the heat of the day, from Woking and Chertsey, 
so that there was altogether quite a considerable crowd one or two gaily dressed ladies 
among the others. 

It was glaringly hot, not a cloud in the sky, 
nor a breath of wind, and the only shadow was 
that of the few scattered pine-trees. The burning heather had been extinguished, but the 
level ground towards Ottershaw was blackened 
as far as one could see, and still giving off 
vertical streamers of smoke. An enterprising 
sweetstuff dealer in the Chobham Road had 
sent up his son with a barrow-load of green 
apples and ginger-beer. 

Going to the edge of the pit, I found it 
occupied by a group of about half a dozen men 
Henderson, Ogilvy, and a tall fair-haired 
man that I afterwards learnt was Stent, the 
Astronomer Royal, with several workmen 
wielding spades and pickaxes. Stent was 


On Horsell Common 23 

giving directions in a clear, high - pitched 
voice. He was standing on the cylinder, 
which was now evidently much cooler ; his 
face was crimson and streaming with perspiration, and something seemed to have irritated 
him. 

A large portion of the cylinder had been uncovered, though its lower end was still embedded. As soon as Ogilvy saw me among 
the staring crowd on the edge of the pit, he 
called to me to come down, and asked me if I 
would mind going over to see Lord Hilton, the 
lord of the manor. 

The growing crowd, he said, was becoming 
a serious impediment to their excavations, 
especially the boys. They wanted a light 
railing put up, and help to keep the people 
back. He told me that a faint stirring was 
occasionally still audible within the case, but 
that the workmen had failed to unscrew the 
top, as it afforded no grip to them. The case 
appeared to be enormously thick, and it was 
possible that the faint sounds we heard
represented a noisy tumult in the interior. 

I was very glad to do as he asked, and so 
become one of the privileged spectators within 
the contemplated enclosure. I failed to find 
Lord Hilton at his house, but I was told he 
was expected from London by the six o'clock 
train from Waterloo ; and as it was then about 
a quarter past five, I went home, had some 
tea, and walked up to the station to waylay 
him. 

Then I returned to the common the sun was 
setting. Scattered groups were hurrying from 
the direction of Woking, and one or two 
persons were returning. The crowd about the 
pit had increased, and stood out black against 
the lemon-yellow of the sky a couple of hundred
people, perhaps. There were a number 
of voices raised, and some sort of struggle 
appeared to be going on about the pit. Strange 
imaginings passed through my mind. As I 
drew nearer I heard Stent's voice : 

' Keep back ! Keep back !' 

A boy came running towards me. 

' It's a-movin',' he said to me as he passed 
' a-screwin' and a-screwin' out. I don't like it. 
I'm a-goin' 'ome, I am.' 

I went on to the crowd. There were really, 
I should think, two or three hundred people 
elbowing and jostling one another, the one or two 
ladies there being by no means the least active. 
 

' He's fallen in the pit !' cried someone. 

' Keep back !' said several. 

The crowd swayed a little, and I elbowed my 
way through. Everyone seemed greatly excited. I heard a peculiar humming sound from 
the pit. 
say !' said Ogilvy, help keep these idiots 
back. We don't know what's in the confounded 
thing, you know !' 

I saw a young man, a shop assistant in 
Woking I believe he was, standing on the 
cylinder and trying to scramble out of the hole 
again. The crowd had pushed him in. 

The end of the cylinder was being screwed 
out from within. Nearly two feet of shining 
screw projected. Somebody blundered against 
me, and I narrowly missed being pitched on 
to the top of the screw. I turned, and as I did 
so the screw must have come out, and the lid 
of the cylinder fell upon the gravel with a ringing concussion. I stuck my elbow into the 
person behind me, and turned my head towards 
the Thing again. For a moment that circular 
cavity seemed perfectly black. I had the sunset in my eyes. 

I think everyone expected to see a man 
emerge possibly something a little unlike us 
terrestrial men, but in all essentials a man. I 
know I did. But, looking, I presently saw 
something stirring within the shadow grayish 
billowy movements, one above another, and 
then two luminous discs like eyes. Then 
something resembling a little gray snake, about 
the thickness of a walking-stick, coiled up out 
of the writhing middle, and wriggled in the air 
towards me and then another. 

A sudden chill came over me. There was a 
loud shriek from a woman behind. I half 
turned, keeping my eyes fixed upon the cylinder 
still, from which other tentacles were now 
projecting, and began pushing my way back 
from the edge of the pit. I saw astonishment 
giving place to horror on the faces of the 
people about me. I heard inarticulate exclamations
on all sides. There was a general movement backward.
I saw the shopman struggling still on the edge of
the pit. I found myself alone, and saw the people on
the other side of the pit running off, Stent among them.
I looked again at the cylinder, and ungovernable 
terror gripped me. I stood petrified and staring. 

A big grayish, rounded bulk, the size, perhaps,
of a bear, was rising slowly and painfully 
out of the cylinder. As it bulged up and 
caught the light, it glistened like wet leather. 
 
Two large dark-coloured eyes were regarding 
me steadfastly. It was rounded, and had, one 
might say, a face. There was a mouth under 
the eyes, the lipless brim of which quivered 
and panted, and dropped saliva. The body 
heaved and pulsated convulsively. A lank 
tentacular appendage gripped the edge of the 
cylinder, another swayed in the air. 

Those who have never seen a living Martian 
can scarcely imagine the strange horror of their 
appearance. The peculiar V-shaped mouth 
with its pointed upper lip, the absence of brow 
ridges, the absence of a chin beneath the 
wedge-like lower lip, the incessant quivering of 
this mouth, the Gorgon groups of tentacles, the 
tumultuous breathing of the lungs in a strange 
atmosphere, the evident heaviness and painfulness
of movement, due to the greater gravitational
energy of the earth above all, the extraordinary 
intensity of the immense eyes culminated in an effect
akin to nausea. There was something fungoid in the
oily brown skin, something in the clumsy deliberation
of their tedious movements unspeakably terrible. Even 
at this first encounter, this first glimpse, I was 
overcome with disgust and dread. 

Suddenly the monster vanished. It had toppled over
the brim of the cylinder and fallen into the pit,
with a thud like the fall of a great mass of leather.
I heard it give a peculiar thick cry, and forthwith
another of these creatures appeared darkly in the deep
shadow of the aperture. 

At that my rigour of terror passed away. I 
turned and, running madly, made for the first 
group of trees, perhaps a hundred yards away; 
but I ran slantingly and stumbling, for I could 
not avert my face from these things. 

There, among some young pine-trees and 
furze bushes, I stopped, panting, and waited 
further developments. The common round the 
sand-pits was dotted with people, standing, like 
myself, in a half-fascinated terror, staring at 
these creatures, or, rather, at the heaped gravel 
at the edge of the pit in which they lay. And 
then, with a renewed horror, I saw a round, 
black object bobbing up and down on the edge 
of the pit. It was the head of the shopman 
who had fallen in, but showing as a little black 
object against the hot western sky. Now he 
got his shoulder and knee up, and again he 
seemed to slip back until only his head was 
visible. Suddenly he vanished, and I could 
have fancied a faint shriek had reached me. I 
had a momentary impulse to go back and help 
him that my fears overruled. 

Everything was then quite invisible, hidden 
by the deep pit and the heap of sand that the 
fall of the cylinder had made. Anyone coming 
along the road from Chobham or Woking 
would have been amazed at the sight a dwindling multitude of perhaps a hundred people or 
more standing in a great irregular circle, in 
ditches, behind bushes, behind gates and 
hedges, saying little to one another, and that in 
short, excited shouts, and staring, staring hard 
at a few heaps of sand. The barrow of gingerbeer stood, a queer derelict, black against the 
burning sky, and in the sand-pits was a row of 
deserted vehicles with their horses feeding out 
of nose-bags or pawing the ground. 


The Heat-Ray

After the glimpse I had had of the Martians 
emerging from the cylinder in which they had 
come to the earth from their planet, a kind of 
fascination paralyzed my actions. I remained 
standing knee-deep in the heather, staring at 
the mound that hid them. I was a battleground
of fear and curiosity. 

I did not dare to go back toward the pit, but 
I felt a passionate longing to peer into it. I 
began walking, therefore, in a big curve, seeking
some point of vantage, and continually looking
at the sand-heaps that hid these new-comers 
to our earth. Once a leash of thin black whips, 
like the arms of an octopus, flashed across the 
sunset and was immediately withdrawn, and 
afterwards a thin rod rose up, joint by joint, 
bearing at its apex a circular disc that spun with a 
wobbling motion. What could be going on there? 

Most of the spectators had gathered in one 
or two groups one a little crowd towards
the front, the other a knot of people in the 
back of the garden. Evidently they shared 
a mental conflict. There were few near me. 
One man I approached he was, I perceived, 
a neighbour of mine, though I did not know 
his name and accosted. But it was scarcely 
a time for articulate conversation. 

' What ugly brutes' he said. ' Good God ! 
what ugly brutes !' He repeated this over and 
over again. 

' Did you see a man in the pit ?' I said ; but 
he made me no answer to that. We became 
silent, and stood watching for a time side by 
side, deriving, I fancy, a certain comfort in one 
another's company. Then I shifted my position to
a little knoll that gave me the advantage 
of a yard or more of elevation, and when I 
looked for him presently he was walking towards
Woking. 

The sunset faded to twilight before anything 
further happened. The crowd far away on the 
left, towards Woking, seemed to grow, and I 
heard now a faint murmur from it. The little 
knot of people towards Chobham dispersed. 
There was scarcely an intimation of movement 
from the pit. 

It was this, as much as anything, that gave 
people courage, and I suppose the new arrivals 
from Woking also helped to restore confidence. 
At any rate, as the dusk came on, a slow, 
intermittent movement upon the sand-pits began, 
a movement that seemed to gather force as the 
stillness of the evening about the cylinder
remained unbroken. Vertical black figures in 
twos and threes would advance, stop, watch, and 
advance again, spreading out as they did so in a 
thin irregular crescent that promised to enclose 
the pit in its attenuated horns. I, too, on my 
side began to move towards the pit. 

Then I saw some cabmen and others had 
walked boldly into the sand-pits, and heard the 
clatter of hoofs and the gride of wheels. I saw 
a lad trundling off the barrow of apples. And 
then, within thirty yards of the pit, advancing 
from the direction of Horsell, I noted a little 
black knot of men, the foremost of whom was 
waving a white flag. 

This was the Deputation. There had been 
a hasty consultation, and, since the Martians 
were evidently, in spite of their repulsive 
forms, intelligent creatures, it had been resolved 
' to show them, by approaching them with signals, 
that we, too, were intelligent. 

Flutter, flutter, went the flag, first to the 
right, then to the left. It was too far for me to 
recognise anyone there, but afterwards I learnt 
that Ogilvy, Stent, and Henderson were with 
others in this attempt at communication. This 
little group had in its advance dragged inward, 
so to speak, the circumference of the now 
almost complete circle of people, and a number 
of dim black figures followed it at discreet 
distances. 

Suddenly there was a flash of light, and a 
quantity of luminous greenish smoke came out 
of the pit in three distinct puffs, which drove 
up, one after the other, straight into the still air. 

This smoke (or flame, perhaps, would be the 
better word for it) was so bright that the deep 
blue sky overhead, and the hazy stretches of 
brown common towards Chertsey, set with black 
pine-trees, seemed to darken abruptly as these 
puffs arose, and to remain the darker after their 
dispersal. At the same time a faint hissing 
sound became audible. 

Beyond the pit stood the little wedge of 
people, with the white flag at its apex, arrested 
by these phenomena, a little knot of small 
vertical black shapes upon the black ground. 
As the green smoke rose, their faces flashed 
out pallid green, and faded again as it vanished. 

Then slowly the hissing passed into a humming, into a long, loud, droning noise. Slowly 
a humped shape rose out of the pit, and the 
ghost of a beam of light seemed to flicker out 
from it. 

Forthwith flashes of actual flame, a bright 
glare leaping from one to another, sprang from 
the scattered group of men. It was as if 
some invisible jet impinged upon them and 
flashed into white flame. It was as if each 
man were suddenly and momentarily turned 
to fire. , 

Then, oy the light of their own destruction, I 
saw them staggering and falling, and their
supporters turning to run. 

I stood staring, not as yet realizing that this 
was death leaping from man to man in that 
little distant crowd. All I felt was that it was 
something strange. An almost noiseless and 
blinding flash of light, and a man fell headlong 
and lay still, and as the unseen shaft of heat 
passed over them, pine-trees burst into fire, 
and every dry furze-bush became with one 
dull thud a mass of flames. And far away 
towards Knaphill I saw the flashes of trees 
and hedges and wooden buildings suddenly set 
alight. 

It was sweeping round swiftly and steadily, 
this flaming death, this invisible, inevitable 
sword of heat. I perceived it coming towards 
me by the flashing bushes it touched, and was 
too astounded and stupefied to stir. I heard 
the crackle of fire in the sand-pits and the 
sudden squeal of a horse that was as suddenly 
stilled. Then it was as if an invisible yet 
intensely heated finger was drawn through the 
heather between me and the Martians, and all 
along a curving line beyond the sand-pits the 
dark ground smoked and crackled. Something 
fell with a crash, far away to the left where 
the road from Woking Station opens out on 
the common. Forthwith the hissing and
humming ceased, and the black, dome-like object 
sank slowly out of sight into the pit. 

All this had happened with such swiftness 
that I had stood motionless, dumfounded and 
dazzled by the flashes of light. Had that 
death swept through a full circle, it must 
inevitably have slain me in my surprise. But 
it passed and spared me, and left the night 
about me suddenly dark and unfamiliar. 

The undulating common seemed now dark 
almost to blackness, except where its roadways 
lay gray and pale under the deep-blue sky 
of the early night. It was dark, and suddenly 
void of men. Overhead the stars were mustering, and in the west the sky was still a pale, 
bright, almost greenish blue. The tops of the 
pine-trees and the roofs of Horsell came out 
sharp and black against the western after-glow. 
The Martians and their appliances were altogether invisible, save for that thin mast upon 
which their restless mirror wobbled. Patches 
of bush and isolated trees here and there 
smoked and glowed still, and the houses towards 
Woking Station were sending up spires of flame 
into the stillness of the evening air. 

Nothing was changed save for that and a 
terrible astonishment. The little group of black 
specks with the flag of white had been swept 
out of existence, and the stillness of the
evening, so it seemed to me, had scarcely been 
broken. 

It came to me that I was upon this dark 
common, helpless, unprotected and alone. Suddenly
like a thing falling upon me from without came Fear. 

With an effort I turned and began a stumbling run
through the heather. 

The fear I felt was no rational fear but a 
panic terror, not only of the Martians, but of 
the dusk and stillness all about me. Such an 
extraordinary effect in unmanning me it had 
that I ran weeping silently as a child might 
do. Once I had turned, I did not dare to 
look back. 

I remember I felt an extraordinary persuasion that
I was being played with, that presently, when I was
upon the very verge ot safety, this mysterious death
as swift as the passage of light would leap after me
from the pit about the cylinder, and strike me down. 


The Chobham Road

Ii is still a matter of wonder how the Martians 
are able to slay men so swiftly and so silently. 
Many think that in some way they are able to 
generate an intense heat in a chamber of practically absolute non-conductivity. This intense 
heat they project in a parallel beam against 
any object they choose by means of a polished 
parabolic mirror of unknown compositionmuch as the parabolic mirror of a lighthouse 
projects a beam of light. But no one has 
absolutely proved these details. However it is 
done, it is certain that a beam of heat is the 
essence of the matter. Heat, and invisible, 
instead of visible light. Whatever is combustible
flashes into flame at its touch, lead runs 
like water, it softens iron, cracks and melts 
glass, and when it falls upon water incontinently
that explodes into steam. 

That night nearly forty people lay under the 
starlight about the pit, charred and distorted 
beyond recognition, and all night long the 
common from Horsell to Maybury was 
deserted, and brightly ablaze. 

The news of the massacre probably reached 
Chobham, Woking, and Ottershaw about the 
same time. In Woking the shops had closed 
when the tragedy happened, and a number of 
people, shop-people and so forth, attracted by 
the stories they had heard, were walking over 
Horsell Bridge and along the road between the 
hedges that run out at last upon the common. 
You may imagine the young people brushed 
up after the labours of the day, and making this 
novelty, as they would make any novelty, the 
excuse for walking together and enjoying a trivial 
flirtation. You may figure to yourself the hum 
of voices along the road in the gloaming. 

As yet, of course, few people in Woking even 
knew that the cylinder had opened, though 
poor Henderson had sent a messenger on a 
bicycle to the post-office with a special wire to 
an evening paper. 

As these folks came out by twos and threes 
upon the open, they found little knots of people 
talking excitedly, and peering at the spinning 
mirror over the sand-pits, and the new-comers 
were, no doubt, soon infected by the excitement 
of the occasion. 

By half-past eight, when the Deputation was 
destroyed, there may have been a crowd of 
300 people or more at this place, besides those 
who had left the road to approach the Martians 
nearer. There were three policemen, too, one 
of whom was mounted, doing their best, under 
instructions from Stent, to keep the people back 
and deter them from approaching the cylinder. 
There was some booing from those more 
thoughtless and excitable souls to whom a crowd 
is always an occasion for noise and horse-play. 

Stent and Ogilvy, anticipating some possibilities of a collision, had telegraphed from 
Horsell to the barracks as soon as the Martians 
emerged, for the help of a company of soldiers 
to protect these strange creatures from violence. 
After that they returned to lead that ill-fated 
advance. The description of their death, as it 
was seen by the crowd, tallies very closely 
with my own impressions : the three puffs of 
green smoke, the deep humming note, and the 
flashes of flame. 

But that crowd of people had a far narrower 
escape than mine. Only the fact that a hummock of heathery sand intercepted the lower 
part of ved them. Had the 
elevation of the parabolic mirror been a few 
yards higher, none could have lived to tell the 
tale. They saw the flashes, and the men 
falling, and an invisible hand, as it were, lit the 
bushes as it hurried towards them through the 
twilight. Then, with a whistling note that rose 
above the droning of the pit, the beam swung 
close over their heads, lighting the tops of the 
beech-trees that line the road, and splitting the 
bricks, smashing the windows, firing the windowframes, and bringing down in crumbling ruin 
a portion of the gable of the house nearest the 
corner. 

In the sudden thud, hiss and glare of the 
igniting trees, the panic-stricken crowd seems to 
have swayed hesitatingly for some moments. 

Sparks and burning twigs began to fall into 
the road, and single leaves like puffs of flame. 
Hats and dresses caught fire. Then came a 
crying from the common. 

There were shrieks and shouts, and suddenly 
a mounted policeman came galloping through 
the confusion with his hands clasped over his 
head, screaming. 

' They're coming !' a woman shrieked, and 
incontinently everyone was turning and pushing 
at those behind, in order to clear their way to 
Woking again. They must have bolted as 
blindly as a flock of sheep. Where the road 
grows narrow and black between the high 
banks the crowd jammed and a desperate 
struggle occurred. All that crowd did not 
escape ; three persons at least, two women and 
a little boy, were crushed and trampled there 
and left to die amidst the terror and the 
darkness. 


How I reached home 

For my own part, I remember nothing of my 
flight except the stress of blundering against 
trees and stumbling through the heather. All 
about me gathered the invisible terrors of the 
Martians ; that pitiless sword of heat seemed 
whirling to and fro, flourishing overhead before 
it descended and smote me out of life. I came 
into the road between the cross-roads and 
Horsell, and ran along this to the cross-roads. 

At last I could go no further ; I was exhausted 
with the violence of my emotion and of my 
flight, and I staggered and fell by the wayside. 
That was near the bridge that crosses the canal by
the gasworks. I fell and lay still. 

I must have remained there some time. 

I sat up, strangely perplexed. For a moment, 
perhaps, I could not clearly understand how I 
came there. My terror had fallen from me like 
a garment. My hat had gone, and my collar 
had burst away from its stud. A few minutes 
before there had only been three real things 
before me the immensity of the night and 
space and nature, my own feebleness and 
anguish, and the near approach of death. Now 
it was as if something turned over, and the point 
of view altered abruptly. There was no sensible 
transition from one state of mind to the other. 
I was immediately the self of every day again, 
a decent ordinary citizen. The silent common, 
the impulse of my flight, the starting flames, 
were as if it were a dream. I asked myself had 
these latter things indeed happened. I could 
not credit it. 

I rose and walked unsteadily up the steep 
incline of the bridge. My mind was blank 
wonder. My muscles and nerves seemed drained 
of their strength. I dare say I staggered 
drunkenly. A head rose over the arch, and the 
figure of a workman carrying a basket appeared. 
Beside him ran a little boy. He passed me, 
wishing me good-night. I was minded to 
speak to him, and did not. I answered his 
greeting with a meaningless mumble and went 
on over the bridge. 

Over the May bury arch a train, a billowing 
tumult of white, firelit smoke, and a long
caterpillar of lighted windows, went flying south: 
clatter, clatter, clap, rap, and it had gone. A 
dim group of people talked in the gate of one 
of the houses in the pretty little row of gables 
that was called Oriental Terrace. It was all 
so real and so familiar. And that behind me ! 
It was frantic, fantastic ! Such things, I told 
myself, could not be. 

Perhaps I am a man of exceptional moods. 
I do not know how far my experience is 
common. At times I suffer from the strangest 
sense of detachment from myself and the 
world about me ; I seem to watch it all from 
the outside, from somewhere inconceivably remote, out of time, out of space, out of the 
stress and tragedy of it all. This feeling was 
very strong upon me that night. Here was 
another side to my dream. 

But the trouble was the blank incongruity 
of this serenity and the swift death flying 
yonder, not two miles away. There was a 
noise of business from the gasworks, and the 
electric lamps were all alight. I stopped at the 
group of people. 

' What news from the common ?' said I. 

There were two men and a woman at the gate. 

' Eh ?' said one of the men, turning. 

' What news from the common ?' I said. 
 Ain't yer just been there ?' asked the men. 


How I reached Home  

1 People seem fair silly about the common,' 
said the woman over the gate. ' What's it all 
abart ?' 

' Haven't you heard of the men from Mars ?' 
said I. 'The creatures from Mars ?' 

' Quite enough,' said the woman over the 
gate. ' Thenks ;' and all three of them laughed. 

I felt foolish and angry. I tried and found 
I could not tell them what I had seen. They 
laughed again at my broken sentences. 

' You'll hear more yet I said, and went on 
to my home. 

I startled my wife at the doorway, so haggard
was I. I went into the dining-room, sat 
down, drank some wine, and so soon as I could 
collect myself sufficiently told her the things 
I had seen. The dinner, which was a cold 
one, had already been served, and remained 
neglected on the table while I told my 
story. 

' There is one thing,' I said to allay the 
fears I had aroused. 'They are the most 
sluggish things I ever saw crawl. They may 
-"keep the pit and kill people who come near 
them, but they cannot get out of it. But 
the horror of them !' 

' Don't, dear!' said my wife, knitting her 
brows and putting her hand on mine. 

' Poor Ogilvy !' I said. ' To think he may 
be lying dead there !' 

My wife at least did not find my experience 
incredible. When I saw how deadly white her 
face was, I ceased abruptly. 

' They may come here,' she said again and 
again. 

I pressed her to take wine, and tried to reassure her. 

' They can scarcely move,' I said. 

I began to comfort her and myself by repeating
all that Ogilvy had told me of the impossibility
of the Martians establishing themselves on the earth.
In particular I laid stress on the gravitational
difficulty. On the surface of the earth the force
of gravity is three times what it is on the surface 
of Mars. A Martian, therefore, would weigh three times
more than on Mars, albeit his muscular strength would 
be the same. His own body would be a cope of lead to him, 
therefore. That indeed was the general opinion. 
Both the Times and the Daily Telegraph, for 
instance, insisted on it the next morning, and 
both overlooked, just as I did, two obvious 
modifying influences. 

The atmosphere of the earth, we now know, 
contains far more oxygen or far less argon 
(whichever way one likes to put it) than does 
Mars'. The invigorating influences of this excess of oxygen upon the Martians indisputably 
did much to counterbalance the increased 
weight of their bodies. And, in the second 
place, we all overlooked the fact that such 
mechanical intelligence as the Martian possessed was quite able to dispense with muscular 
exertion at a pinch. 

But I did not consider these points at the 
time, and so my reasoning was dead against the 
chances of the invaders. With wine and food, 
the confidence of my own table, and the 
necessity of reassuring my wife, I grew, by 
insensible degrees, courageous and secure. 

' They have done a foolish thing,' said I, 
fingering my wineglass. ' They are dangerous, 
because no doubt they are mad with terror. 
Perhaps they expected to find no living things 
- certainly no intelligent living things. A 
shell in the pit,' said I, 'if the worst comes 
to the worst, will kill them all.' 

The intense excitement of the events had no 
doubt left my perceptive powers in a state of 
'-erethism. I remember that dinner-table with 
extraordinary vividness even now. My dear 
wife's sweet, anxious face peering at me from 
under the pink lamp-shade, the white cloth with 
its silver and glass table furniture for in those 
days even philosophical writers had many little 
luxuries the crimson-purple wine in my glass, 
are photographically distinct. At the end of it 
I sat, tempering nuts with a cigarette, regretting Ogilvy's rashness, and denouncing the 
short-sighted timidity of the Martians. 

So some respectable dodo in the Mauritius 
might have lorded it in his nest, and discussed 
the arrival of that shipful of pitiless sailors in 
want of animal food. ' We will peck them to 
death to-morrow, my dear.' 

I did not know it, but that was the last 
civilized dinner I was to eat for very many 
strange and terrible days. 


Friday night

The most extraordinary thing to my mind, of 
all the strange and wonderful things that 
happened upon that Friday, was the dovetailing 
of the commonplace habits of our social 
order with the first beginnings of the series of 
events that was to topple that social order 
headlong. If on Friday night you had taken 
a pair of compasses and drawn a circle with a 
radius of five miles round the Woking sandpits,
I doubt if you would have had one human 
being outside it, unless it was some relation of 
Stent or of the three or four cyclists or London 
people who lay dead on the common, whose 
emotions or habits were at all affected by the 
new-comers. Many people had heard of the 
cylinder, of course, and talked about it in their 
leisure, but it certainly did not make the sensation an ultimatum to Germany would have 
done. 

In London that night poor Henderson's 
telegram describing the gradual unscrewing of 
the shot was judged to be a canard, and his 
evening paper, after wiring for authentication 
from him and receiving no reply the man was 
killed decided not to print a special edition. 

Within the five-mile circle even the great 
majority of people were inert. I have already 
described the behaviour of the men and women 
to whom I spoke. All over the district people 
were dining and supping ; working-men were 
gardening after the labours of the day, children 
were being put to bed, young people were 
wandering through the lanes love-making, 
students sat over their books. 

Maybe there was a murmur in the village 
streets, a novel and dominant topic in the 
public-houses, and here and there a messenger, 
or even an eye-witness of the later occurrences, 
caused a whirl of excitement, a shouting and a 
running to and fro ; but for the most part the 
daily routine of working, eating, drinking, 
sleeping, went on as it had done for countless 
years as though no planet Mars existed in the 
sky. Even at Woking Station and Horsell 
and Chobham that was the case. 

In Woking Junction, until a late hour, trains 
were stopping and going on, others were shunting
on the sidings, passengers were alighting 
and waiting, and everything was proceeding in 
the most ordinary way. A boy from town, 
trenching on Smith's monopoly, was selling 
papers with the afternoon's news. The ringing
and impact of trucks, the sharp whistle of 
the engines from the junction, mingled with 
his shouts of ' Men from Mars !' Excited 
men came into the station with incredible 
tidings about nine o'clock, and caused no more 
disturbance than drunkards might have done. 
People rattling Londonwards peered into the 
darkness outside the carriage windows and saw 
only a rare, flickering, vanishing spark dance 
up from the direction of Horsell, a red glow 
and a thin veil of smoke driving across the 
stars, and thought that nothing more serious 
than a heath fire was happening. It was only 
round the edge of the common that any
disturbance was perceptible. There were half a 
dozen villas burning on the Woking border. 
There were lights in all the houses on the 
common side of the three villages, and the 
people there kept awake till dawn. 

A curious crowd lingered restlessly, people 
coming and going but the crowd remaining, 
both on the Chobham and Horsell bridges. 
One or two adventurous, souls, it was afterwards 
found, went into the darkness and crawled quite 
near the Martians ; but they never returned, for 
now and again a light-ray, like the beam of a 
warship's searchlight, swept the common, and 
s ready to follow. Save for 
such, that big area of common was silent and 
desolate, and the charred bodies lay about on it 
all night under the stars, and all the next day. 
A noise of hammering from the pit was heard 
by many people. 

So you have the state of things on Friday 
night. In the centre, sticking into the skin of 
our old planet Earth like a poisoned dart, was 
this cylinder. But the poison was scarcely 
working yet. Around it was a patch of silent 
common, smouldering in places, and with a few 
dark, dimly - seen objects lying in contorted 
attitudes here and there. Here and there was 
a burning bush or tree. Beyond was a fringe of 
excitement, and further than that fringe the
inflammation had not crept as yet. In the rest 
of the world the stream of life still flowed as it 
had flowed for immemorial years. The fever 
of war that would presently clog vein and 
artery, deaden nerve and destroy brain, had 
still to develop. 

All night long the Martians were hammering 
and stirring, sleepless, indefatigable, at work 
upon the machines they were making ready, 
and ever and again a puff of greenish-white 
smoke whirled up to the starlit sky. 

About eleven a company of soldiers came 
through Horsell, and deployed along the edge 
of the common to form a cordon. Later a 
second company marched through Chobham to 
deploy on the north side of the common. 
Several officers from the Inkerman barracks 
had been on the common earlier in the day, 
and one, Major Eden, was reported to be missing.
The Colonel of the regiment came to the 
Chobham bridge, and was busy questioning the 
crowd at midnight. The military authorities 
were certainly alive to the seriousness of the
business. About eleven, the next morning's papers 
were able to say, a squadron of hussars, two 
Maxims, and about 400 men of the Cardigan 
regiment, started from Aldershot. 

A few seconds after midnight the crowd in 
the Chertsey road, Woking, saw a star fall 
from heaven into the pine-woods to the northwest. It fell with a greenish light, causing a 
flash of light like summer lightning. This was 
the second cylinder. 


The fighting begins 

Saturday lives in my memory as a day of 
suspense. It was a day of lassitude too, hot 
and close, with, I am told, a rapidly fluctuating 
barometer. I had slept but little, though my 
wife had succeeded in sleeping, and I rose 
early. I went into my garden before breakfast,
and stood listening, but towards the common there
was nothing stirring but a lark. 

The milkman came as usual. I heard the 
rattle of his chariot, and I went round to 
the side -gate to ask the latest news. He 
told me that during the night the Martians 
had been surrounded by troops, and that 
guns were expected. Then, a familiar reassuring
note, I heard a train running towards Woking. 

' They aren't to be killed said the milkman, 
' if that can possibly be avoided.' 

I saw my neighbour gardening, chatted with 
him for a time, and then strolled in to breakfast. 
It was a most unexceptional morning. My 
neighbour was of opinion that the troops would 
be able to capture or to destroy the Martians 
during the day. 

It's a pity they make themselves so unapproachable,'
he said. ' It would be curious to learn how they
live on another planet ; we might learn a thing or two.' 

He came up to the fence and extended a 
handful of strawberries, for his gardening was 
as generous as it was enthusiastic. At the 
same time he told me of the burning of the 
pine-woods about the Byfleet Golf Links. 

' They say,' said he, ' that there's another oil 
those blessed things fallen there number two. 
But one's enough, surely. This lot '11 cost the 
insurance people a pretty penny before everything's settled.' He laughed with an air of the 
greatest good-humour as he said this. The 
woods, he said, were still burning, and pointed 
out a haze of smoke to me. ' They will be hot 
under foot for days on account of the thick soil 
--of pine-needles and turf, 1 he said, and then 
grew serious over ' poor Ogilvy.' 

After breakfast, instead of working, I decided 
to walk down towards the common. Under the 
railway-bridge I found a group of soldiers
sappers, I think, men in small round caps, dirty 
red jackets unbuttoned, and showing their blue 
shirts, dark trousers, and boots coming to the 
calf. They told me no one was allowed over 
the canal, and, looking along the road towards 
the bridge, I saw one of the Cardigan men 
standing sentinel there. I talked with these 
soldiers for a time ; I told them of my sight of 
the Martians on the previous evening. None 
of them had seen the Martians, and they had 
but the vaguest ideas of them, so that they 
plied me with questions. They said that they 
did not know who had authorized the movements of the troops ; their idea was that a 
dispute had arisen at the Horse Guards. The 
ordinary sapper is a great deal better educated 
than the common soldier, and they discussed the 
peculiar conditions of the possible fight with 
some acuteness. I described the Heat- Ray to 
them, and they began to argue among themselves. 

' Crawl up under cover and rush 'em, say I,' 
said one. 

' Get aht !' said another. ' What's Cover 
against this 'ere 'eat ? Sticks to cook yer ! 
What we got to do is to go as near as the 
ground '11 let us, and then drive a trench.' 

' Blow yer trenches ! You always want 
trenches ; you ought to ha' been born a rabbit, 
Snippy.' 

' Ain't they got any necks, then ?' said a 
third abruptly a little, contemplative, dark 
man, smoking a pipe. 

I repeated my description. 

' Octopuses,' said he, ' that's what I calls 
'em. Talk about fishers of men fighters of 
fish it is this time !' 

' It ain't no murder killing beasts like that,' 
said the first speaker. 

' Why not shell the darned things strite off 
and finish 'em ?' said the little dark man. 'You 
earn tell what they might do.' 
Where's your shells ?' said the first speaker. 
' There ain't no time. Do it in a rush, that's 
my tip, and do it at once.' 

So they discussed it. After a while I left 
them, and went on to the railway-station to 
get as many morning papers as I could. 

But I will not weary the reader with a description of that long morning and of the longer afternoon. I did not succeed in getting a glimpse of 
the common, for even Horsell and Chobham 
church towers were in the hands of the military 
authorities. The soldiers I addressed didn't 
know anything ; the officers were mysterious as 
well as busy. I found people in the town quite 
secure again in the presence of the military, 
and I heard for the first time from Marshall, 
the tobacconist, that his son was among the 
dead on the common. The soldiers had made 
the people on the outskirts of Horsell lock up 
and leave their houses. 

I got back to lunch about two, very tired, 
for, as I have said, the day was extremely hot 
and dull, and in order to refresh myself I took 
a cold bath in the afternoon. About half-past 
four I went up to the railway-station to get an 
evening paper, for the morning papers had contained only a very inaccurate description of the 
killing of Stent, Henderson, Ogilvy, and the 
others. But there was little I didn't know. 
The Martians did not show an inch of themselves. They seemed busy in their pit, and 
there was a sound of hammering and an almost 
continuous streamer of smoke. Apparently, 
they were busy getting ready for a struggle. 
' Fresh attempts have been made to signal, but 
without success,' was the stereotyped formula of 
the papers. A sapper told me it was done by 
a man in a ditch with a flag on a long pole. 
The Martians took as much notice of such 
advances as we should of the lowing of a 
cow. 

I must confess the sight of all this armament, 
all this preparation, greatly excited me. My 
imagination became belligerent, and defeated 
the invaders in a dozen striking ways ; something of my schoolboy dreams of battle and 
heroism came back. It hardly seemed a fair 
fight to me at that time. They seemed very 
helpless in this pit of theirs. 

About three o'clock there began the thud of 
a gun at measured intervals from Chertsey or 
Addlestone. I learnt that the smouldering 
pine-wood into which the second cylinder had 
fallen was being shelled, in the hope of destroying that object before it opened. It was only 
above five, however, that a field-gun reached 
Chobham for use against the first body of 
Martians. 

About six in the evening, as I sat at tea with 
my wife in the summer-house talking vigorously 
about the battle that was lowering upon us, I 
heard a mufHed detonation from the common, 
and immediately after a gust of firing. Close 
on the heels of that came a violent, rattling 
crash, quite close to us, that shook the ground ; 
and, starting out upon the lawn, I saw the tops 
of the trees about the Oriental College burst 
into smoky red flame, and the tower of the 
little church beside it slide down into ruin. 
The pinnacle of the mosque had vanished, and
the roof-line of the college itself looked as if a 
hundred-ton gun had been at work upon it. 
One of our chimneys cracked as if a shot had 
hit it, flew, and the piece of it came clattering 
down the tiles and made a heap of broken red 
fragments upon the flower-bed by my study 
window. 

I and my wife stood amazed. Then I realized 
that the crest of Maybury Hill must be within 
range of the Martians' Heat- Ray now that the 
college was cleared out of the way. 

At that I gripped my wife's arm, and without 
ceremony ran her out into the road. Then I 
fetched out the servant, telling her I would go 
upstairs myself for the box she was clamouring 
for. 

' We can't possibly stay here,' I said ; and as 
I spoke the firing re-opened for a moment upon 
the common. 

' But where are we to go ?' said my wife in 
terror. 

I thought, perplexed. Then I remembered 
her cousins at Leatherhead. 

' Leatherhead !' I shouted above the sudden 
noise. 

She looked away from me downhill. The 
people were coming out of their houses astonished. 
' How are we to get to Leatherhead ? she said. 

Down the hill I saw a bevy of hussars 
ride under the railway-bridge ; three galloped 
through the open gates of the Oriental College ; 
two others dismounted, and began running from 
house to house. The sun, shining through the 
smoke that drove up from the tops of the trees, 
seemed blood-red, and threw an unfamiliar lurid 
light upon everything. 

1 Stop here,' said I ; ' you are safe here ;' and 
I started off at once for the Spotted Dog, for I 
knew the landlord had a horse and dogcart. 
I ran, for I perceived that in a moment everyone upon this side of the hill would be moving. 
I found him in his bar, quite unaware of what 
was going on behind his house. A man stood 
with his back to me, talking to him. 

' I must have a pound,' said the landlord, 
' and I've no one to drive it.' 

' I'll give you two,' said I, over the stranger's 
shoulder. 

'What for?' 

' And I'll bring it back by midnight,' I said. 

' Lord !' said the landlord, ' what's the 
hurry ? I'm selling my bit of a pig. Two 
pounds, and you bring it back ? What's going 
on now ?' 

I explained hastily that I had to leave my 
home, and so secured the dogcart. At the 
time it did not seem to me nearly so urgent 
that the landlord should leave his. I took care to 
have the cart there and then, drove it off down 
the road, and, leaving it in charge of my wife 
and servant, rushed into my house and packed 
a few valuables, such plate as we had, and so 
forth. The beech-trees below the house were 
burning while I did this, and the palings up the 
road glowed red. While I was occupied in this 
way, one of the dismounted hussars came running up. He was going from house to house, 
warning people to leave. He was going on 
as I came out of my front-door, lugging my 
treasures, done up in a table-cloth. I shouted 
after him : 
' What news ?' 
He turned, stared, bawled something about 
crawling out in a thing like a dish cover and 
ran on to the gate of the house at the crest. 
A sudden whirl of black smoke driving across 
the road hid him for a moment. I ran to my 
neighbour's door, and rapped to satisfy myself, 
what I already knew, that his wife had gone to 
London with him, and had locked up their 
house. I went in again according to my promise 
to get my servant's box, lugged it out, clapped 
it beside her on the tail of the dogcart, and 
then caught the reins and jumped up into the 
driver's seat beside my wife. In another 
moment we were clear of the smoke and 
noise, and spanking down the opposite slope 
of May bury Hill towards Old Woking. 

In front was a quiet sunny landscape, a wheatfield ahead on either side of the road, and the 
May bury Inn with its swinging sign. I saw 
the doctor's cart ahead of me. At the bottom 
of the hill I turned my head to look at the 
hillside I was leaving. Thick streamers of 
black smoke shot with threads of red fire were 
driving up into the still air, and throwing dark 
shadows upon the green tree-tops eastward. 
The smoke already extended far away to the 
east and west to the Byfleet pine-woods eastward, and to Woking on the west. The road 
was dotted with people running towards us. 
And very faint now, but very distinct through 
the hot, quiet air, one heard the whirr of a 
machine-gun that was presently stilled, and an 
intermittent cracking of rifles. Apparently, the 
-Martians were setting fire to everything within 
range of their Heat- Ray. 

I am not an expert driver, and I had immediately to turn my attention to the horse. 
When I looked back again the second hill had
hidden the black smoke. I slashed the horse 
with the whip, and gave him a loose rein until 
Woking and Send lay between us and that 
quivering tumult. I overtook and passed the 
doctor between Woking and Send. 


In the storm

Leatherhead is about twelve miles from 
May bury Hill. The scent of hay was in the 
air through the lush meadows beyond Pyrford, 
and the hedges on either side were sweet and 
gay with multitudes of dog-roses. The heavy 
firing that had broken out while we were driving 
down Maybury Hill ceased as abruptly as it 
began, leaving the evening very peaceful and 
still. We got to Leatherhead without misadventure about nine o'clock, and the horse 
had an hour's rest while I took supper with 
my cousins and commended my wife to their 
care. 

My wife was curiously silent throughout the 
drive, and seemed oppressed with forebodings 
"of evil. I talked to her reassuringly, pointing 
out that the Martians were tied to the pit by 
sheer heaviness, and, at the utmost, could but 
crawl a little out of it, but she answered only 
in monosyllables. Had it not been for my 
promise to the innkeeper, she would, I think, 
have urged me to stay in Leatherhead that 
night. Would that I had ! Her face, I remember, was very white as we parted. 

For my own part, I had been feverishly excited all day. Something very like the war-fever, 
that occasionally runs through a civilized community, had got into my blood, and in my heart 
I was not so very sorry that I had to return to 
May bury that night. I was even afraid that 
last fusillade I had heard might mean the 
extermination of our invaders from Mars. I 
can best express my state of mind by saying 
that I wanted to be in at the death. 

It was nearly eleven when I started to return, 
The night was unexpectedly dark ; to me, 
walking out of the lighted passage of my 
cousins' house, it seemed indeed black, and it 
was as hot and close as the day. Overhead 
the clouds were driving fast, albeit not a breath 
stirred the shrubs about us. My cousins' man 
lit both lamps. Happily, I knew the road 
intimately. My wife stood in the light of the 
doorway, and watched me until I jumped up 
into the dogcart. Then abruptly she turned 
and went in, leaving my cousins side by side 
wishing me good hap. 

I was a little depressed at first with the contagion of my wife's fears, but very soon my 
thoughts reverted to the Martians. At that 
time I was absolutely in the dark as to the 
course of the evening's fighting. I did not 
know even the circumstances that had precipitated the conflict. As I came through 
Ockham (for that was the way I returned, and 
not through Send and Old Woking) I saw 
along the western horizon a blood-red glow, 
which, as I drew nearer, crept slowly up the 
sky. The driving clouds of the gathering 
thunderstorm mingled there with masses of 
black and red smoke. 

Ripley Street was deserted, and except for a 
lighted window or so the village showed not 
a sign of life ; but I narrowly escaped an 
accident at the corner of the road to Pyrford, 
where a knot of people stood with their backs 
to me. They said nothing to me as I passed. 
I do not know what they knew of the things 
happening beyond the hill, nor do I know if 
the silent houses I passed on my way were 
sleeping securely, or deserted and empty, or 
harassed and watching against the terror of the 
night. 

From Ripley until I came through Pyrford I 
was in the valley of the Wey, and the red glare 
was hidden from me. As I ascended the little 
hill beyond Pyrford Church the glare came into 
view again, and the trees about me shivered 
with the first intimation of the storm that was 
upon me. Then I heard midnight pealing out 
from Pyrford Church behind me, and then came 
the silhouette of May bury Hill, with its treetops and roofs black and sharp against the red. 

Even as I beheld this, a lurid green glare lit 
the road about me, and showed the distant 
woods towards Addlestone. I felt a tug at the 
reins. I saw that the driving clouds had been 
pierced as it were by a thread of green fire, 
suddenly lighting their confusion and falling 
into the fields to my left. It was the Third 
Falling Star ! 

Close on its apparition, and blindingly violet 
by contrast, danced out the first lightning of 
the gathering storm, and the thunder burst like 
a rocket overhead. The horse took the bit 
between his teeth and bolted. 

A moderate incline runs down towards the 
foot of Maybury Hill, and down this we 
clattered. Once the lightning had begun, it 
went on in as rapid a succession of flashes as 
I have ever seen. The thunder-claps, treading 
one on the heels of another and with a strange 
crackling accompaniment, sounded more like 
the working of a gigantic electric machine 
than the usual detonating reverberations. The 
flickering light was blinding and confusing, and 
a thin hail smote gustily at my face as I drove 
down the slope. 

At first I regarded little but the road before 
me, and then abruptly my attention was arrested 
by something that was moving rapidly down 
the opposite slope of Maybury Hill. At first 
I took it for the wet roof of a house, but one 
flash following another showed it to be in swift 
rolling movement. It was an elusive vision 
a moment bewildering darkness, and then in 
a flash like daylight, the red masses of the 
Orphanage near the crest of the hill, the green 
tops of the pine-trees, and this problematical 
object came out clear and sharp and bright. 
And this thing I saw! How can I describe 
it? A monstrous tripod, higher than many 
houses, striding over the young pine-trees, and 
smashing them aside in its career ; a walking 
engine of glittering metal, striding now across 
the heather ; articulate ropes of steel dangling 
from it, and the clattering tumult of its passage" 
mingling with the riot of the thunder.' A flash, 
and it came out vividly, heeling over one way 
with two feet in the air, to vanish and reappear 
almost instantly as it seemed, with the next 
flash, a hundred yards nearer. Can you imagine 
a milking-stool tilted and bowled violently 
along the ground ? That was the impression 
those instant flashes gave. But instead of a 
milking-stool imagine it a great body of 
machinery on a tripod stand. 

Then suddenly the trees in the pine-wood 
ahead of me were parted, as brittle reeds are 
parted by a man thrusting through them ; they 
were snapped off and driven headlong, and a 
second huge , tripod appeared, rushing, as it 
seemed, headlong towards me. And I was 
galloping hard to meet it ! At the sight of the 
second monster, my nerve went altogether. 
Not stopping to look again, I wrenched the 
horse's head hard round to the right, and in 
another moment the dogcart had heeled over 
upon the horse ; the shafts smashed noisily, and 
I was flung sideways and fell heavily into a 
shallow pool of water. 

I crawled out almost immediately, and 
crouched, my feet still in the water, under a 
clump of furze. The horse lay motionless (his 
neck was broken, poor brute !), and by the 
lightning flashes I saw the black bulk of the 
overturned dogcart, and the silhouette of 
the wheel still spinning slowly. In another 
moment the colossal mechanism went striding 
by me, and passed uphill towards Pyrford. 

Seen nearer, the thing was incredibly strange, 
for it was no mere insensate machine driving 
on its way. Machine it was, with a ringing 
metallic pace, and long flexible glittering tentacles (one of which gripped a young pine-tree) 
swinging and rattling about its strange body. 
It picked its road as it went striding along, and 
the brazen hood that surmounted it moved to 
and fro with the inevitable suggestion of a head 
looking about it. Behind the main body was 
a huge thing of white metal like a gigantic 
fisherman's basket, and puffs of green smoke 
squirted out from the joints of the limbs as the 
monster swept by me. And in an instant it 
was gone. 

So much  saw then, all vaguely for the 
flickering of the lightning, in blinding high 
lights and dense black shadows. 

As it passed it set up an exultant deafening 
howl that drowned the thunder, ' Aloo ! aloo !' 
and in another minute it was with its companion, and half a mile away, stooping over 
something in the field. I have no doubt 
this thing in the field was the third of the 
ten cylinders they had fired at us from 
Mars. 

For some minutes I lay there in the rain and 
darkness watching, by the intermittent light, 
these monstrous beings of metal moving about 
in the distance over the hedge-tops. A thin 
hail was now beginning, and as it came and 
went, their figures grew misty and then flashed 
into clearness again. Now and then came a 
gap in the lightning, and the night swallowed 
them up. 

I was soaked with hail above and puddlewater below. It was some time before my blank 
astonishment would let me struggle up the bank 
to a drier position, or think at all of my imminent 
peril. 

Not far from me was a little one-roomed 
squatter's hut of wood, surrounded by a patch 
of potato-garden. I struggled to my feet at 
last, and, crouching and making use of every 
chance of cover, I made a run for this. I hammered at the door, but I could not make the 
people hear (if there were any people inside), 
and after a time I desisted, and, availing myself 
of a ditch for the greater part of the way, succeeded in crawling, unobserved by these 
monstrous machines, into the pine-wood towards 
Maybury. 

Under cover of this I pushed on, wet and 
shivering now, towards my own house. I 
walked among the trees trying to find the footpath. It was very dark indeed in the wood, 
for the lightning was now becoming infrequent, 
and the hail, which was pouring down in a 
torrent, fell in columns through the gaps in the 
heavy foliage. 

If I had fully realized the meaning of all the 
things I had seen I should have immediately 
worked my way round through Byfleet to Street 
Cobham, and so gone back to rejoin my wife 
at Leatherhead. But that night the strangeness 
of things about me, and my physical wretchedness, prevented me, for I was bruised, weary, 
wet to the skin, deafened and blinded by the 
storm. 

I had a vague idea of going on to my own 
house, and that was as much motive as I had. 
I staggered through the trees, fell into a ditch 
and bruised my knees against a plank, and 
finally splashed out into the lane that ran down 
from the College Arms. I say splashed, for 
the storm water was sweeping the sand down 
the hill in a muddy torrent. There in the 
darkness a man blundered into me and sent me 
reeling back. 

He gave a cry of terror, sprung sideways, 
and rushed on before I could gather my wits 
sufficiently to speak to him. So heavy was the 
stress of the storm just at this place that I had 
the hardest task to win my way up the hill. I
went close up to the fence on the left and worked 
my way along its palings. 

Near the top I stumbled upon something 
soft, and, by a flash of lightning, saw between 
my feet a heap of black broadcloth and a pair 
of boots. Before I could distinguish clearly 
how the man lay, the flicker of light had passed. 
I stood over him waiting for the next flash. 
When it came, I saw that he was a sturdy man, 
cheaply but not shabbily dressed ; his head was 
bent under his body, and he lay crumpled up 
close to the fence, as though he had been flung 
violently against it. 

Overcoming the repugnance natural to one 
who had never before touched a dead body, I 
stooped and turned him over to feel for his 
heart. He was quite dead. Apparently his 
neck had been broken. The lightning flashed 
for a third time, and his face leapt upon me. I 
sprang to my feet. It was the landlord of the 
Spotted Dog, whose conveyance I had taken. 

I stepped over him gingerly and pushed on 
up the hill. I made my way by the policestation and the College Arms towards my own 
house. Nothing was burning on the hillside, 
though from the common there still came a red 
glare and a rolling tumult of ruddy smoke beating up against the drenching hail. So far as I 
could see by the flashes, the houses about me 
were mostly uninjured. By the College Arms 
a dark heap lay in the road. 

Down the road towards Maybury Bridge 
there were voices and the sound of feet, but I 
had not the courage to shout or to go to them. 
I let myself in with my latch-key, closed, locked 
and bolted the door, staggered to the foot of the 
staircase and sat down. My imagination was 
full of those striding metallic monsters, and of 
the dead body smashed against the fence. 

I crouched at the foot of the staircase with my 
back to the wall, shivering violently. 


At the window 

I have said already that my storms of emotion 
have a trick of exhausting themselves. After 
a time I discovered that I was cold and wet, 
and with little pools of water about me on the 
stair-carpet. I got up almost mechanically, 
went into the dining-room and drank some 
whisky, and then I was moved to change my 
clothes. 

After I had done that I went upstairs to my 
study, but why I did so I do not know. The 
window of my study looks over the trees and 
the railway towards Horsell Common. In the 
hurry of our departure this window had been 
left open. The passage was dark, and, by 
contrast with the picture the window-frame 
enclosed, that side of the room seemed impenetrably dark. I stopped short in the doorway. 

The thunderstorm had passed. The towers 
of the Oriental College and the pine-trees about 
it had gone, and very far away, lit by a vivid 
red glare, the common about the sand-pits was 
visible. Across the light, huge black shapes, 
grotesque and strange, moved busily to and 
fro. 
It seemed, indeed, as if the whole country 
in that direction was on fire a broad hillside 
set with minute tongues of flame, swaying and 
writhing with the gusts of the dying storm, and 
throwing a red reflection upon the cloud scud 
above. Every now and then a haze of smoke 
from some nearer conflagration drove across 
the window and hid the Martian shapes I 
could not see what they were doing, nor the 
clear form of them, nor recognise f the black 
objects they were busied upon. Neither could 
I see the nearer fire, though the reflections of 
it danced on the wall and ceiling of the study. 
A sharp, resinous twang of burning was in the 
air. 

I closed the door noiselessly and crept 
towards the window. As I did so, the view 
opened out until, on the one hand, it reached 
to the houses about Woking Station, and on 
the other to the charred and blackened pinewoods of Byfleet. There was a light down 
below the hill, on the railway, near the arch, 
and several of the houses along the Maybury 
road and the streets near the station were 
glowing ruins. The light upon the railway 
puzzled me at first ; there was a black heap 
and a vivid glare, and to the right of that a 
row of yellow oblongs. Then I perceived this 
was a wrecked train, the fore part smashed 
and on fire, the hinder carriages still upon the 
rails. 

Between these three main centres of light, 
the houses, the train, and the burning country 
towards Chobham, stretched irregular patches 
of dark country, broken here and there by 
intervals of dimly glowing and smoking ground. 
It was the strangest spectacle, that black 
expanse set with fire. It reminded me, more 
than anything else, of the Potteries seen at 
night. People at first I could distinguish 
none, though I peered intently for them. 
Later I saw against the light of Woking 
Station a number of black figures hurrying one 
after the other across the line. 

And this was the little world in which I had 
been living securely for years, this fiery chaos ! 
What had happened in the last seven hours I 
still did not know, nor did I know, though I 
was beginning to guess, the relation between 
these mechanical colossi and the sluggish 
lumps I had seen disgorged from the cylinder. 
With a queer feeling of impersonal interest I 
turned my desk-chair to the window, sat down, 
and stared at the blackened country, and particularly at the three gigantic black things that 
were going to and fro in the glare about the 
sand-pits. 

They seemed amazingly busy. I began to 
ask myself what they could be. Were they 
intelligent mechanisms ? Such a thing I felt 
was impossible. Or did a Martian sit within 
each, ruling, directing, using, much as a man's 
brain sits and rules in his body ? I began 
to compare the things to human machines, to 
ask myself for the first time in my life how an 
ironclad or a steam-engine would seem to an 
intelligent lower animal. 

The storm had left the sky clear, and over 
the smoke of the burning land the little fading 
pin-point of Mars was dropping into the west, 
when the soldier came into my garden. I 
heard a slight scraping at the fence, and rousing 
myself from the lethargy that had fallen upon 
me, I looked down and saw him dimly, 
clambering over the palings. At the sight of 
another human being my torpor passed, and 
I leant out of the window eagerly. 

' Hist !' said I in a whisper. 

He stopped astride of the fence in doubt. 
Then he came over and across the lawn to the 
corner of the house. He bent down and 
stepped softly. 

' Who's there ?' he said, also whispering, 
standing under the window and peering up. 

' Where are you going ?' I asked. 

' God knows.' 

' Are you trying to hide ?' 

' That's it.' 

' Come into the house,' I said. 

I went down, unfastened the door and let 
him in, and locked the door again. I could not 
see his face. He was hatless, and his coat was 
unbuttoned. 

' My God !' he said as I drew him in. 

' What has happened ?' I asked. 

' What hasn't ?' In the obscurity I could see 
he made a gesture of despair. ' They wiped 
us out simply wiped us out,' he repeated again 
and again. 

He followed me, almost mechanically, into 
the dining-room. 

' Take some whisky,' I said, pouring out a 
stiff dose. 

He drank it. Then abruptly he sat down 
before the table, put his head on his arms, and 
began to sob and weep like a little boy, in a 
perfect passion of emotion, while I, with a 
curious forgetfulness of my own recent despair, 
stood beside him wondering. 

It was a long time before he could steady his 
nerves to answer my questions, and then he 
answered perplexingly and brokenly. He was 
a driver in the artillery, and had only come 
into action about seven. At that time firing 
was going on across the common, and it was 
said the first party of Martians were crawling 
slowly towards their second cylinder under 
cover of a metal shield. 

Later this shield staggered up on tripod legs, 
and became the first of the fighting machines I 
had seen. The gun he drove had been unlimbered near Horsell, in order to command 
the sand-pits, and its arrival had precipitated 
the action. As the limber gunners went to 
the rear, his horse trod in a rabbit-hole and 
came down, throwing him into a depression of 
the ground. At the same moment the gun 
exploded behind him, the ammunition blew up, 
there was fire all about him, and he found himself lying under a heap of charred dead men and 
dead horses. 

' I lay still,' he said, ' scared out of my wits, 
with the fore-quarter of a horse atop of me. 
We'd been wiped out. And the smell good 
God ! Like burnt meat ! I was hurt across 
the back by the fall of the horse, and there I 
had to lie until I felt better. Just like parade 
it had been a minute before then stumble, 
bang, swish ! 

' Wiped out !' he said. 

He had hid under the dead horse for a long 
time, peeping out furtively across the common. 
The Cardigan men had tried a rush, in skirmishing order, at the pit, simply to be swept out of 
existence. Then the monster had risen to its 
feet, and had begun to walk leisurely to and fro 
across the common, among the few fugitives, 
with its head-like hood turning about exactly 
like the head of a cowled human being. A 
kind of arm carried a complicated metallic 
case, about which green flashes scintillated, and 
out of the funnel of this there smote the HeatRay. 

In a few minutes there was, so far as the 
soldier could see, not a living thing left upon 
the common, and every bush and tree upon it 
that was not already a blackened skeleton was 
burning. The hussars had been on the road 
beyond the curvature of the ground, and he sawnothing of them. He heard the Maxims rattle 
for a time, and then become still. The giant 
saved Woking Station and its cluster of houses 
until last ; then in a moment the Heat- Ray was 
brought to bear, and the town became a heap of 
fiery ruins. Then the thing shut off the HeatRay, and, turning its back upon the artilleryman, 
began to waddle away towards the smouldering 
pine-woods that sheltered the second cylinder. 
As it did so, a second glittering Titan built itself 
up out of the pit. 

The second monster followed the first, and at 
that the artilleryman began to crawl very 
cautiously across the hot heather ash towards 
Horsell. He managed to get alive into the 
ditch along by the side of the road, and so 
escaped to Woking. There his story became 
ejaculatory. The place was impassable. It 
seems there were a few people alive there, 
frantic for the most part, and many burnt and 
scalded. He was turned aside by the fire, and 
hid among some almost scorching heaps of 
broken wall as one of the Martian giants returned. He saw this one pursue a man, catch 
him up in one of its steely tentacles, and knock 
his head against the trunk of a pine-tree. At 
last, after nightfall, the artilleryman made a 
rush for it and got over the railway embankment. 

Since then he had been skulking along towards 
Maybury, in the hope of getting out of danger 
Londonward. People were hiding in trenches
and cellars, and many of the survivors had made 
off towards Woking Village and Send. He had 
been consumed with thirst until he found one of 
the water mains near the railway arch smashed, 
and the water bubbling out like a spring upon 
the road. 

That was the story I got from him bit by 
bit. He grew calmer telling me and trying to 
make me see the things he had seen. He had 
eaten no food since mid-day, he told me early 
in his narrative, and I found some mutton and 
bread in the pantry and brought it into the 
room. We lit no lamp, for fear of attracting the 
Martians, and ever and again our hands would 
touch upon bread or meat. As he talked, things 
about us came darkly out of the darkness, and 
the trampled bushes and broken rose-trees outside the window grew distinct. It would seem 
that a number of men or animals had rushed 
across the lawn. I began to see his face, 
blackened and haggard, as no doubt mine was 
also. 

When we had finished eating we went softly 
upstairs to my study, and I looked again out of 
the open window. In one night the valley had 
become a valley of ashes. The fires had 
dwindled now. Where flames had been there 
were now streamers of smoke ; but the count
less ruins of shattered and gutted houses and 
blasted and blackened trees that the night had 
hidden stood out now gaunt and terrible in the 
pitiless light of dawn. Yet here and there 
some object had had the luck to escape a 
white railway signal here, the end of a greenhouse there, white and fresh amidst the wreckage. Never before in the history of warfare 
had destruction been so indiscriminate and 
so universal. And, shining with the growing 
light of the east, three of the metallic giants 
stood about the pit, their cowls rotating as 
though they were surveying the desolation they 
had made. 

It seemed to me that the pit had been 
enlarged, and ever and again puffs of vivid 
green vapour streamed up out of it towards 
the brightening dawn streamed up, whirled, 
broke, and vanished. 

Beyond were the pillars of fire about Chobham. They became pillars of bloodshot smoke 
at the first touch of day. 


What I saw of the destruction of Weybridge and Shepperton 

As the dawn grew brighter we withdrew ourselves from the window from which we had 
watched the Martians, and went very quietly 
downstairs. 

The artilleryman agreed with me that the 
house was no place to stay in. He proposed, 
he said, to make his way Londonward, and 
thence rejoin his battery No. 12, of the Horse 
Artillery. My plan was to return at once to 
Leatherhead, and so greatly had the strength 
of the Martians impressed me that I had 
determined to take my wife to Newhaven, 
and go with her out of the country forthwith. 
For I already perceived clearly that the country 
about London must inevitably be the scene of a 
disastrous struggle before such creatures as these 
could be destroyed. 

Between us and Leatherhead, however, lay the 
third cylinder, with its guarding giants. Had 
I been alone, I think I should have taken my 
chance and struck across country. But the 
artilleryman dissuaded me : 'It's no kindness 
to the right sort of wife,' he said, ' to make her 
a widow ;' and in the end I agreed to go with 
him, under cover of the woods, northward as far 
as Street Cobham before I parted with him. 
Thence I would make a big detour by Epsom 
to reach Leatherhead. 

I should have started at once, but my companion had been in active service, and he knew 
better than that. He made me ransack the 
house for a flask, which he filled with whisky ; 
and we lined every available pocket with 
packets of biscuits and slices of meat. Then 
we crept out of the house, and ran as quickly 
as we could down the ill-made road by which I 
had come overnight. The houses seemed deserted. In the road lay a group of three charred 
bodies close together, struck dead by the HeatRay ; and here and there were things that the 
people had dropped a clock, a slipper, a 
silver spoon, and the like poor valuables. At 
the corner turning up towards the post-office a 
little cart, filled with boxes and furniture, and 
horseless, heeled over on a broken wheel. A 
cash-box had been hastily smashed open, and 
thrown under the debris. 

Except the lodge at the Orphanage, which 
was still on fire, none of the houses had suffered 
very greatly here. d shaved 
the chimney-tops and passed. Yet, save ourselves, there did not seem to be a living soul 
on Maybury Hill. The majority of the inhabitants had escaped, I suppose, by way of 
the Old Woking road the road I had taken 
when I drove to Leatherhead or they had 
hidden. 

We went down the lane, by the body of the 
man in black, sodden now from the overnight 
hail, and broke into the woods at the foot of 
the hill. We pushed through these towards 
the railway, without meeting a soul. The 
woods across the line were but the scarred and 
blackened ruins of woods ; for the most part 
the trees had fallen, but a certain proportion 
still stood, dismal gray stems, with dark-brown 
foliage instead of green. 

On our side the fire had done no more than 
scorch the nearer trees ; it had failed to secure 
its footing. In one place the woodmen had 
been at work on Saturday ; trees, felled and 
freshly trimmed, lay in a clearing, with heaps 
of sawdust, by the sawing machine and its 
engine. Hard by was a temporary hut, deserted. There was not a breath of wind this 
morning, and everything was strangely still. 
Even the birds were hushed, and as we 
hurried along, I and the artilleryman talked 
in whispers, and looked now and again over 
our shoulders. Once or twice we stopped to 
listen. 

After a time we drew near the road, and as 
we did so we heard the clatter of hoofs, and 
saw through the tree - stems three cavalry 
soldiers riding slowly towards Woking. We 
hailed them, and they halted while we hurried 
towards them. It was a lieutenant and a couple 
of privates of the 8th Hussars, with a stand 
like a theodolite, which the artilleryman told 
me was a heliograph. 

' You are the first men I've seen coming 
this way this morning,' said the lieutenant. 
' What's brewing ?' 

His voice and face were eager. The men 
behind him stared curiously. The artilleryman 
jumped down the bank into the road and 
saluted. 

' Gun destroyed last night, sir. Have been 
hiding. Trying to rejoin battery, sir. You'll 
come in sight of the Martians, I expect, about 
half a mile along this road.' 

' What the dickens are they like ?' asked the 
lieutenant. 
 

' Giants in armour, sir. Hundred feet high. 
Three legs and a body like 'luminium, with a 
mighty great head in a hood, sir.' 

' Get out !' said the lieutenant. ' What confounded nonsense !' 

' You'll see, sir. They carry a kind of box, 
sir, that shoots fire and strikes you dead.' 

' What d'ye mean a gun ?' 

' No, sir,' and the artilleryman began a vivid 
account of the Heat- Ray. Halfway through 
the lieutenant interrupted him and looked up at 
me. I was still standing on the bank by the 
side of the road. 

' Did you see it ?' said the lieutenant. 

'It's perfectly true,' I said. 

' Well,' said the lieutenant, ' I suppose it's 
my business to see it too. Look here ' to the 
artilleryman ' we're detailed here clearing 
people out of their houses. You'd better go 
along and report yourself to Brigadier-General 
Marvin, and tell him all you know. He's at 
W 7 eybridge. Know the way ?' 

' I do,' I said ; and he turned his horse 
southward again. 

' Half a mile, you say ?' said he. 

'At most,' I answered, and pointed over the 
tree-tops southward. He thanked me and rode 
on, and we saw them no more. 
Further along we came upon a group of 
three women and two children in the road, 
busy clearing out a labourer's cottage. They 
had got hold of a little hand-truck, and were 
piling it up with unclean-looking bundles and 
shabby furniture. They were all too assiduously 
engaged to talk to us as we passed. 

By Byfleet Station we emerged from the pinetrees, and found the country calm and peaceful 
under the morning sunlight. We were far beyond the range of the Heat- Ray there, and 
had it not been for the silent desertion of some 
of the houses, the stirring movement of packing 
in others, and the knot of soldiers standing on 
the bridge over the railway and staring down 
the line towards Woking, the day would have 
seemed very like any other Sunday. 

Several farm waggons and carts were moving 
creakily along the road to Addlestone, and 
suddenly through the gate of a field we saw, 
across a stretch of flat meadow, six twelvepounders, standing neatly at equal distances 
and pointing towards Woking. The gunners 
cStood by the guns waiting, and the ammunition 
waggons were at a business-like distance. The 
men stood almost as if under inspection. 

'That's good!' said I. 'They will get one 
fair shot, at any rate.' 

The artilleryman hesitated at the gate. 

' I shall go on,' he said. 

Further on towards Weybridge, just over 
the bridge, there were a number of men in 
white fatigue jackets throwing up a long rampart, and more guns behind. 

' It's bows and arrows against the lightning, 
anyhow said the artilleryman. ' They 'aven't 
seen that fire-beam yet.' 

The officers who were not actively engaged 
stood and stared over the tree-tops southwestward, and the men digging would stop 
every now and again to stare in the same 
direction. 

Byfleet was in a tumult, people packing, and 
a score of hussars, some of them dismounted, 
some on horseback, were hunting them about. 
Three or four black Government waggons, 
with crosses in white circles, and an old 
omnibus, among other vehicles, were being 
loaded in the village street. There were 
scores of people, most of them sufficiently 
Sabbatical to have assumed their best clothes. 
The soldiers were having the greatest difficulty 
in making them realize the gravity of their 
position. We saw one shrivelled old fellow 
with a huge box and a score or more of 
flower-pots containing orchids, angrily expos
tulating with the corporal who would leave 
them behind. I stopped and gripped his 
arm. 

' Do you know what's over there ?' I said, 
pointing at the pine-tops that hid the Martians. 

' Eh ?' said he, turning. ' I was explainin' 
these is vallyble.' 

' Death !' I shouted. ' Death is coming ! 
Death !' and, leaving him to digest that if he 
could, I hurried on after the artilleryman. At 
the corner I looked back. The soldier had 
left him, and he was still standing by his box 
with the pots of orchids on the lid of it, and 
staring vaguely over the trees. 

No one in Weybridge could tell us where the 
headquarters were established ; the whole place 
was in such confusion as I had never seen in any 
town before. Carts, carriages everywhere, the 
most astonishing miscellany of conveyances and 
horseflesh. The respectable inhabitants of the 
place, men in golf and boating costumes, wives 
prettily dressed, were packing, riverside loafers 
energetically helping, children excited, and, for 
4he most part, highly delighted at this astonishing variation of their Sunday experiences. In 
the midst of it all the worthy vicar was very 
pluckily holding an early celebration, and his 
bell was jangling out above the excitement. 

I and the artilleryman, seated on the step of 
the drinking-fountain, made a very passable 
meal upon what we had brought with us. 
Patrols of soldiers here no longer hussars, but 
grenadiers in white were warning people to 
move now or to take refuge in their cellars as 
soon as the firing began. We saw as we crossed 
the railway bridge that a growing crowd of 
people had assembled in and about the railwaystation, and the swarming platform was piled 
with boxes and packages. The ordinary traffic 
had been stopped, I believe, in order to allow of 
the passage of troops and guns to Chertsey, and 
I have heard since that a savage struggle 
occurred for places in the special trains that were 
put on at a later hour. 

We remained at Weybridge until mid-day, 
and at that hour we found ourselves at the 
place near Shepperton Lock where the Wey 
and Thames join. Part of the time we spent 
helping two old women to pack a little cart. 
The Wey has a treble mouth, and at this point 
boats are to be hired, and there was a ferry 
across the river. On the Shepperton side was 
an inn, with a lawn, and beyond that the tower 
of Shepperton Church it has been replaced by 
a spire rose above the trees. 

Here we found an excited and noisy crowd 
of fugitives. As yet the flight had not grown 
to a panic, but there were already far more 
people than all the boats going to and fro could 
enable to cross. People came panting along 
under heavy burdens ; one husband and wife 
were even carrying a small outhouse door 
between them, with some of their household 
goods piled thereon. One man told us he meant 
to try to get away from Shepperton Station. 

There was a lot of shouting, and one man 
was even jesting. The idea people seemed to 
have here was that the Martians were simply 
formidable human beings, who might attack and 
sack the town, to be certainly destroyed in the 
end. Every now and then people would glance 
nervously across the Wey, at the meadows 
towards Chertsey, but everything over there 
was still. 

Across the Thames, except just where the 
boats landed, everything was quiet, in vivid contrast with the Surrey side. The people who 
landed there from the boats went tramping off 
down the lane. The big ferry-boat had just 
-made a journey. Three or four soldiers stood 
on the lawn of the inn, staring and jesting at 
the fugitives, without offering to help. The 
inn was closed, as it was now within prohibited 
hours. 

' What's that !' cried a boatman, and ' Shut 

up, you fool !' said a man near me to a yelping 

dog. Then the sound came again, this time 

from the direction of Chertsey, a muffled thud 

the sound of a gun. 

The fighting was beginning. Almost immediately unseen batteries across the river to our 
right,' unseen because of the trees, took up the 
chorus, firing heavily one after the other. A 
woman screamed. Everyone stood arrested by 
the sudden stir of battle, near us and yet 
invisible to us. Nothing was to be seen save 
flat meadows, cows feeding unconcernedly for 
the most part, and silvery pollard willows 
motionless in the warm sunlight. 

' The sojers '11 stop 'em,' said a woman beside 
me doubtfully. A haziness rose over the treetops. 

Then suddenly we saw a rush of smoke far 
away up the river, a puff of smoke that jerked 
up into the air, and hung, and forthwith the 
ground heaved under foot and a heavy explosion 
shook the air, smashing two or three windows 
in the houses near, and leaving us astonished. 

' Here they are !' shouted a man in a blue 
jersey. ' Yonder ! D'yer see them ? Yonder !' 

Quickly, one after the other, one, two, three, 
four of the armoured Martians appeared, far 
away over the little trees, across the flat meadows 
that stretch towards Chertsey, and striding 
hurriedly towards the river. Little cowled 
figures they seemed at first, going with a rolling 
motion and as fast as flying birds. 

Then, advancing obliquely towards us, came 
a fifth. Their armoured bodies glittered in the 
sun, as they swept swiftly forward upon the 
guns, growing rapidly larger as they drew 
nearer. One on the extreme left, the remotest, 
that is, flourished a huge case high in the air, 
and the ghostly terrible Heat- Ray I had already 
seen on Friday night smote towards Chertsey, 
and struck the town. 

At sight of these strange, swift, and terrible 
creatures, the crowd along by the water's edge 
seemed to me to be for a moment horror-struck. 
There was no screaming or shouting, but a 
silence. Then a hoarse murmur and a movement of feet a splashing from the water. A 
man, too frightened to drop the portmanteau he 
carried on his shoulder, swung round and sent 
me staggering with a blow from the corner of 
his burden. A woman thrust at me with her 
hand and rushed past me. I turned, too, with 
the rush of the people, but I was not too 
terrified for thought. The terrible Heat
Ray was in my mind. To get under water ! 
That was it ! 

' Get under water !' I shouted unheeded. 

I faced about again, and rushed towards the 
approaching Martian rushed right down the 
gravelly beach and headlong into the water. 
Others did the same. A boatload of people 
putting back came leaping out as I rushed past. 
The stones under my feet were muddy and 
slippery, and the river was so low that I ran 
perhaps twenty feet scarcely waist-deep. Then, 
as the Martian towered overhead scarcely a 
couple of hundred yards away, I flung myself 
forward under the surface. The splashes of 
the people in the boats leaping into the river 
sounded like thunderclaps in my ears. People 
were landing hastily on both sides of the 
river. 

But the Martian machine took no more 
notice for the moment of the people running 
this way and that than a man would of the confusion of ants in a nest against which his foot 
has kicked. When, half suffocated, I raised 
my head above water the Martian's hood pointed 
at the batteries that were still firing across 
the river, and as it advanced it swung loose 
what must have been the generator of the 
Heat- Ray. 
In another moment it was on the bank, and 
in a stride wading half-way across. The knees 
of its foremost legs bent at the further bank, 
and in another moment it had raised itself to 
its full height again, close to the village of 
Shepperton. Forthwith the six guns, which, 
unknown to anyone on the right bank, had 
been hidden behind the outskirts of that village, 
fired simultaneously. The sudden near concussions, the last close upon the first, made my 
heart jump. The monster was already raising 
the case generating the Heat-Ray, as the first 
shell burst six yards above the hood. 

I gave a cry of astonishment. I saw and 
thought nothing of the other four Martian 
monsters : my attention was riveted upon the 
nearer incident. Simultaneously two other 
shells burst in the air near the body as the hood 
twisted round in time to receive, but not in 
time to dodge, the fourth shell. 

The shell burst clean in the face of the thing. 
The hood bulged, flashed, was whirled off in a 
dozen tattered fragments of red flesh and 
glittering metal. 

'Hit!' shouted I, with something between a 
scream and a cheer. 

I heard answering shouts from the people 
in the water about me. I could have leapt 
out of the water with that momentary exultation. 

The decapitated colossus reeled like a 
drunken giant ; but it did not fall over. It recovered its balance by a miracle, and, no longer 
heeding its steps, and with the camera that fired 
the Heat- Ray now rigidly upheld, it reeled 
swiftly upon Shepperton. The living intelligence, the Martian within the hood, was 
slain and splashed to the four winds of heaven, 
and the thing was now but a mere intricate 
device of metal whirling to destruction. It 
drove along in a straight line, incapable of 
guidance. It struck the tower of Shepperton 
Church, smashing it down as the impact of 
a battering ram might have done, swerved 
aside, blundered on, and collapsed with a 
tremendous impact into the river out of my 
sight. 

A violent explosion shook the air, and a 
spout of water, steam, mud, and shattered 
metal, shot far up into the sky. As the camera 
of the Heat- Ray hit the water, the latter had 
incontinently flashed into steam. In another 
moment a huge wave, like a muddy tidal bore, 
but almost scaldingly hot, came sweeping round 
the bend up-stream. I saw people struggling 
shorewards, and heard their screaming and 
shouting faintly above the seething and roar of 
the Martian's collapse. 

For the moment I heeded nothing of the 
heat, forgot the patent need of self-preservation. 
I splashed through the tumultuous water, pushing aside a man in black to do so, until I could 
see round the bend. Half a dozen deserted 
boats pitched aimlessly upon the confusion of 
the waves. The fallen Martian came into 
sight down-stream, lying across the river, and 
for the most part submerged. 

Thick clouds of steam were pouring off the 
wreckage, and through the tumultuously whirling wisps I could see, intermittently and vaguely, 
the gigantic limbs churning the water and flinging a splash and spray of mud and froth into 
the air. The tentacles swayed and struck like 
living arms, and, save for the helpless purposelessness of these movements, it was as if some 
wounded thing struggled for life amidst the 
waves. Enormous quantities of a ruddy brown 
fluid were spurting up in noisy jets out of the 
machine. 

My attention was diverted from this sight 
by a furious yelling, like that of the thing called 
a siren in our manufacturing towns. A man, 
knee-deep near the towing-path, shouted inaudibly to me and pointed. Looking back, I 
saw the other Martians advancing with gigantic 
strides down the river-bank from the direction 
of Chertsey. The Shepperton guns spoke 
this time unavailingly. 

At that I ducked at once under water, and, 
holding my breath until movement was an 
agony, blundered painfully along under the 
surface as long as I could. The water was 
in a tumult about me, and rapidly growing 
hotter. 

When for a moment I raised my head to take 
breath, and throw the hair and water from my 
eyes, the steam was rising in a whirling white fog 
that at first hid the Martians altogether. The 
noise was deafening. Then I saw them dimly, 
colossal figures of gray, magnified by the mist. 
They had passed by me, and two were stooping 
over the frothing tumultuous ruins of their 
comrade. 

The third and fourth stood beside him in 
the water, one perhaps 200 yards from me, 
the other towards Laleham. The generators 
of the Heat- Rays waved high, and the hissing 
beams smote down this way and that. 

The air was full of sound, a deafening and 
confusing conflict of noises, the clangorous din 
of the Martians, the crash of falling houses, 
the thud of trees, fences, sheds, flashing into
flame, and the crackling and roaring of fire. 
Dense black smoke was leaping up to mingle 
with the steam from the river, and asthe HeatRay went to and fro over Weybridge, its impact was marked by flashes of incandescent 
white, that gave place at once to a smoky dance 
of lurid flames The nearer houses still stood 
intact, awaiting their fate, shadowy, faint and 
pallid in the steam, with the fire behind them 
going to and fro. 

For a moment, perhaps, I stood there, breasthigh in the almost boiling water, dumfounded 
at my position, hopeless of escape. Through 
the reek I could see the people who had been 
with me in the river scrambling out of the 
water through the reeds, like little frogs hurrying through grass from the advance of a man, 
or running to and fro in utter dismay on the 
towing-path. 

Then suddenly the white flashes of the HeatRay came leaping towards me. The houses 
caved in as they dissolved at its touch, and 
darted out flames ; the trees changed to fire 
'with a roar. It flickered up and down the 
towing-path, licking off the people who ran 
this way and that, and came down to the 
water's edge not fifty yards from where I stood. ' 
It swept across the river to Shepperton, and 
the water in its track rose in a boiling wheal 
crested with steam. I turned shoreward. 

In another moment the huge wave, well-nigh 
at the boiling-point, had rushed upon me. I 
screamed aloud, and scalded, half blinded, 
agonized, I staggered through the leaping, 
hissing water towards the shore. Had my 
foot stumbled, it would have been the end. I 
fell helplessly, in full sight of the Martians, 
upon the broad, bare gravelly spit that runs 
down to mark the angle of the Wey and 
Thames. I expected nothing but death. 

I have a dim memory of the foot of a Martian 
coming down within a score of yards of my head, 
driving straight into the loose gravel, whirling it 
this way and that, and lifting again ; of a long 
suspense, and then of the four carrying the 
debris of their comrade between them, now 
clear, and then presently faint, through a veil 
of smoke, receding interminably, as it seemed 
to me, across a vast space of river and meadow. 
And then, very slowly, I realized that by a 
miracle I had escaped. 

It would seem these giants spent the e 
part of the afternoon in going to and fro, 
ferring everything from the second and 
cylinders the second in Addlestone Golf I 
and the third at Pyrford to their origin 
on Horsell Common. Over that, abov 
blackened heather and ruined buildings 
stretched far and wide, stood one as sen 
while the rest abandoned their vast 
machines and descended into the pit. They 
were hard at work there far into the night, and 
the towering pillar of dense green smoke that 
rose therefrom could be seen from the hills about 
Merrow, and even, it is said, from Banstead 
and Epsom Downs. 

And while the Martians behind me were thus 
preparing for their next sally, and in front of 
me Humanity gathered for the battle, I made 
my way, with infinite pains and labour, from 
the fire and smoke of burning Weybridge 
towards London. 

I saw an abandoned boat, very small and 
remote, drifting down-stream, and, throwing off 
the most of my sodden clothes, I went after it, 
gained it, and so escaped out of that destruction. 
There were no oars in the boat, but I contrived 
to paddle, as much as my parboiled hands 
would allow, down the river towards Halliford 
and Walton, going very tediously, and continually looking behind me, as you may well 
understand. 1 followed the river because I 
considered the water gave me my best chance of escape, should these giants return. 

The hot water from the Martian's overthrow 
drifted down-stream with me, so that for the 
best part of a mile I could see little of either 
bank. Once, however, I made out a string of 
black figures hurrying across the meadows from 
the direction of Weybridge. Halliford, it seemed, 
was quite deserted, and several of the houses 
facing the river were on fire. It was strange to 
see the place quite tranquil, quite desolate under 
the hot blue sky, with the smoke and little 
threads of flame going straight up into the heat 
of the afternoon. Never before had I seen 
houses burning without the accompaniment of 
an inconvenient crowd. A little further on the 
dry reeds up the bank were smoking and glowing, and a line of fire inland was marching 
steadily across a late field of hay. 

For a long time I drifted, so painful and 
weary was I after the violence I had been 
through, and so intense the heat upon the 
water. Then my fears got the better of me 
again, and I resumed my paddling. The sun 
scorched my bare back. At last, as the bridge 
at Walton was coming into sight round the 
bend, my fever and faintness overcame my 
fears, and I landed on the Middlesex bank, and 
lay down, deadly sick, amidst the long grass. I 
suppose the time was then about four or five 
o'clock. I got up presently, walked perhaps 
half a mile without meeting a soul, and then lay 
down again in the shadow of a hedge. I seem 
to remember talking wanderingly to myself 
during that last spurt. I was also very thirsty, 
and bitterly regretful I had drunk no more 
water. It is a curious thing that I felt angry 
with my wife ; I cannot account for it, but my 
impotent desire to reach Leatherhead worried 
me excessively. 

I do not clearly remember the arrival of the 
curate, so that I probably dozed. I became 
aware of him as a seated figure in soot-smudged 
shirtsleeves, and with his upturned clean-shaven 
face staring at a faint flickering that danced 
over the sky. The sky was what is called a 
mackerel sky, rows and rows of faint downplumes of cloud, just tinted with the midsummer 
sunset. 

I sat up, and at the rustle of my motion he 
looked at me quickly. 

4 Have you any water ?' I asked abruptly. 

He shook his head. 

4 You have been asking for water for the last 
hour,' he said. 

For a moment we were silent, taking stock 
of one another. I dare say he found me a 
strange enough figure, naked save for my 
water-soaked trousers and socks, scalded, and 
my face and shoulders blackened from the 
smoke. His face was a fair weakness, his chin 
retreated, and his hair lay in crisp, almost flaxen 



 

curls on his low forehead ; his eyes were rather 
large, pale blue, and blankly staring. He spoke 
abruptly, looking vacantly away from me. 

' What does it mean ?' he said. ' What do 
these things mean ?' 

I stared at him and made no answer. 

He extended a thin white hand and spoke 
in almost a complaining tone. 

' Why are these things permitted ? What 
sins have we done ? The morning service was 
over, I was walking through the roads to clear 
my brain for the afternoon, and then fire, 
earthquake, death ! As if it were Sodom and 
Gomorrah ! All our work undone, all the work 
... What are these Martians ?' 

' What are we ?' I answered, clearing my 
throat. 

He gripped his knees and turned to look at 
me again. For half a minute, perhaps, he 
stared silently. 

' I was walking through the roads to clear 
my brains,' he said. ' And suddenly fire, 
earthquake, death !' 

He relapsed into silence, with his chin now 
sunken almost to his knees. 

Presently he began waving his hand : 

' All the work all the Sunday - schools. 
What have we done what has Weybridge 



How I fell in with the Curate 1 1 3 

done ? Everything gone everything destroyed. The church ! We rebuilt it only 
three years ago. Gone ! swept out of existence ! Why ?' 

Another pause, and he broke out again like 
one demented. 

' The smoke of her burning goeth up for 
ever and ever !' he shouted. 

His eyes flamed, and he pointed a lean 
finger in the direction of Weybridge. 

By this time I was beginning to take his 
measure. The tremendous tragedy in which 
he had been involved it was evident he was a 
fugitive from Weybridge had driven him to 
the very verge of his reason. 

' Are we far from Sunbury ?' I said in a 
matter-of-fact tone. 

' What are we to do ?' he asked. ' Are these 
creatures everywhere? Has the earth been 
given over to them ?' 

1 Are we far from Sunbury P 5 

' Only this morning I officiated at early 
celebration. . . .' 

' Things have changed,' I said quietly. 
' You must keep your head. There is still 
hope.' 

'Hope!' 

' Yes; plentiful hope for all this destruction!' 

8 
 

I began to explain my view of our position. 
He listened at first, but as I went on the 
interest in his eyes changed to their former 
stare, and his regard wandered from me. 

' This must be the beginning of the end,' he 
said, interrupting me. ' The end ! The great 
and terrible day of the Lord ! When men 
shall call upon the mountains and the rocks to 
fall upon them and hide them hide them 
from the face of Him that sitteth upon the 
throne !' 

I began to understand the position. I ceased 
rny laboured reasoning, struggled to my feet, 
and, standing over him, laid my hand on his 
shoulder. 

1 Be a man,' said I. 'You are scared out of 
your wits. What good is religion if it collapses 
at calamity ? Think of what earthquakes and 
floods, wars and volcanoes, have done before 
to men. Did you think God had exempted 
Wey bridge ? . . . He is not an insurance agent, 
man.' 

For a time he sat in blank silence. 

' But how can we escape ?' he asked suddenly. 

' They are invulnerable, they are pitiless. . . .' 

' Neither the one nor, perhaps, the other,' 

I answered. ' And the mightier they are, 

the more sane and wary should we be. One 



How I fell in with the Curate 1 1 5 

of them was killed yonder not three hours 
ago.' 

' Killed !' he said, staring about him. ' How 
can God's ministers be killed ?' 

' I saw it happen,' I proceeded to tell him. 
' We have chanced to come in for the thick of 
it,' said I, ' and that is all.' 

' What is that flicker in the sky ?' he asked 
abruptly. 

I told him it was the heliograph signalling 
that it was the sign of human help and effort 
in the sky. 

'We are in the midst of it,' I said, ' quiet as 
it is. That flicker in the sky tells of the 
gathering storm. Yonder, I take it, are the 
Martians, and Londonward, where those hills 
rise about Richmond and Kingston, and 
the trees give cover, earthworks are being 
thrown up and guns are being laid. Presently the Martians will be coming this way 
again. . . .' 

And even as I spoke, he sprang to his feet 
and stopped me by a gesture. 

' Listen !' he said. . . . 

From beyond the low hills across the 
water came the dull resonance of distant 
guns and a remote, weird crying. Then everything was still. A cockchafer came droning 

82 



 

over the hedge and past us. High in the west 
the crescent moon hung faint and pale, above 
the smoke of Weybridge and Shepperton and 
the hot still splendour of the sunset. 

' We had better follow this path,' I said, 
' northward.' 



XIV. 

IN LONDON. 

MY younger brother was in London when the 
Martians fell at Woking. He was a medical 
student, working for an imminent examination, 
and he heard nothing of the arrival until Saturday morning. The morning papers on Saturday 
contained, in addition to lengthy special articles 
on the planet Mars, on life in the planets, and 
so forth, a brief and vaguely-worded telegram, 
all the more striking for its brevity. 

The Martians, alarmed by the approach of a 
crowd, had killed a number of people with a 
quick-firing gun, so the story ran. The telegram concluded with the words : ' Formidable 
as they seem to be, the Martians have not 
moved from the pit into which they have 
fallen, and, indeed, seem incapable of doing so. 
Probably this is due to the relative strength of 
the earth's gravitational energy.' On that last 
text the leader-writers expanded very comfortingly. 



 

Of course, all the students in the crammer's 
biology class, to which my brother went that 
day, were intensely interested, but there were no 
signs of any unusual excitement in the streets. 
The afternoon papers puffed scraps of news 
under big headlines. They had nothing to 
tell beyond the movements of troops about the 
common, and the burning of the pine-woods 
between Woking and Weybridge, until eight. 
Then the St. James s Gazette, in an extra 
special edition, announced the bare fact of the 
interruption of telegraphic communication. This 
was thought to be due to the falling of burning 
pine-trees across the line. Nothing more of 
the fighting was known that night, the night of 
my drive to Leatherhead and back. 

My brother felt no anxiety about us, as he 
knew from the description in the papers that the 
cylinder was a good two miles from my house. 
He made up his mind to run down that night 
to me, in order, as he says, to see the things 
before they were killed. He despatched a 
telegram, which never reached me, about four 
o'clock, and spent the evening at a music-hall. 

In London, also, on Saturday night there 
was a thunderstorm, and my brother reached 
Waterloo in a cab. On the platform from 
which the midnight train usually starts he 



In London 119 

learnt, after some waiting, that an accident 
prevented trains from reaching Woking that 
night. The nature of the accident he could 
not ascertain ; indeed, the railway authorities 
did not clearly know at that time. There was 
very little excitement in the station, as the 
officials, failing to realize that anything further 
than a breakdown between Byfleet and Woking 
Junction had occurred, were running the theatre' 
trains, which usually passed through Woking, 
round by Virginia Water or Guildford. They 
were busy making the necessary arrangements 
to alter the route of the Southampton and Portsmouth Sunday League excursions. A nocturnal 
newspaper reporter, mistaking my brother for 
the traffic manager, whom he does to a slight 
extent resemble, waylaid and tried to interview 
him. Few people, excepting the railway officials, 
connected the breakdown with the Martians. 

I have read, in another account of these 
events, that on Sunday morning ' all London 
was electrified by the news from Woking.' 
As a matter of fact, there was nothing to 
justify that very extravagant phrase. Plenty 
of people in London did not hear of the 
Martians until the panic of Monday morning. 
Those who did took some time to realize all 
that the hastily-worded telegrams in the Sunday 


 

papers conveyed. The majority of people in 
London do not read Sunday papers. 

The habit of personal security, moreover, is 
so deeply fixed in the Londoner's mind, and 
startling intelligence so much a matter of course 
in the papers, that they could read without any 
personal tremors : ' About seven o'clock last 
night the Martians came out of the cylinder, 
and, moving about under an armour of metallic 
shields, have completely wrecked Woking 
Station, with the adjacent houses, and massacred an entire battalion of the Cardigan 
Regiment. No details are known. Maxims 
have been absolutely useless against their 
armour; the field-guns have been disabled 
by them. Flying hussars have been galloping 
into Chertsey. The Martians appear to be 
moving slowly towards Chertsey or Windsor. 
Great anxiety prevails in West Surrey, and 
earthworks are being thrown up to check the 
advance Londonwards.' That was how the 
Sunday Sun put it, and a clever and remarkably prompt ' hand-book ' article in the Referee 
compared the affair to a menagerie suddenly 
let loose in a village. 

No one in London knew positively of the 
nature of the armoured Martians, and there 
was still a fixed idea that these monsters must 



In London 121 

be sluggish : ' crawling,' ' creeping painfully ' 
such expressions occurred in almost all the 
earlier reports. None of the telegrams could 
have been written by an eye-witness of their 
advance. The Sunday papers printed separate 
editions as further news came to hand, some 
even in default of it. But there was practically 
nothing more to tell people until late in the 
afternoon, when the authorities gave the press 
agencies the news in their possession. It was 
stated that the people of Walton and Weybridge, 
and all that district, were pouring along the 
roads Londonward, and that was all. 

My brother went to church at the Foundling 
Hospital in the morning, still in ignorance of 
what had happened on the previous night. 
There he heard allusions made to the invasion, 
and a special prayer for peace. Coming out, 
he bought a Referee. He became alarmed at 
the news in this, and went again to Waterloo 
Station to find out if communication were restored. The omnibuses, carriages, cyclists, 
and innumerable people walking in their best 
clothes, seemed scarcely affected by the strange 
intelligence that the newsvendors were disseminating. People were interested, or, if 
alarmed; alarmed only on account of the local 
residents. At the station he heard for the first 

 

time that the Windsor and Chertsey lines were 
now interrupted. The porters told him that 
several remarkable telegrams had been received 
in the morning from Byfleet and Chertsey 
Stations, but that these had abruptly ceased. 
My brother could get very little precise detail 
out of them. ' There's fighting going on about 
Weybridge,' was the extent of their information. 

The train service was now very much disorganized. Quite a number of people, who 
had been expecting friends from places on the 
South-Western network, were standing about 
the station. One gray-headed old gentleman 
came and abused the South-Western Company 
bitterly to my brother. ' It wants showing up,' 
he said. 

One or two trains came in from Richmond, 
Putney, and Kingston, containing people who 
had gone out for a day's boating, and found 
the locks closed and a feeling of panic in the 
air. A man in a blue and white blazer addressed my brother, full of strange tidings. 

' There's hosts of people driving into Kingston in traps and carts and things, with boxes of 
valuables and all that,' he said. ' They come 
from Molesey and Weybridge and Walton, and 
they say there's been guns heard at Chertsey, 
heavy firing, and that mounted soldiers have 



In London 123 

told them to get off at once because the Martians are coming. We heard guns firing at 
Hampton Court Station, but we thought it was 
thunder. What the dickens does it all mean ? 
The Martians can't get out of their pit, can 
they ?' 

My brother could not tell him. 

Afterwards he found that the vague feeling 
of alarm had spread to the clients of the 
underground railway, and that the Sunday 
excursionists began to return from all the 
South-Western ' lungs ' Barnes, Wimbledon, 
Richmond Park, Kew, and so forth at unnaturally early hours ; but not a soul had 
anything but vague hearsay to tell of. Everyone connected with the terminus seemed illtempered. 

About five o'clock the gathering crowd in 
the station was immensely excited by the 
opening of the line of communication, which 
is almost invariably closed, between the SouthEastern and the South-Western stations, and 
the passage of carriage-trucks bearing huge 
guns, and carriages crammed with soldiers. 
These were the guns that were brought up 
from Woolwich and Chatham to cover Kingston. 
There was an exchange of pleasantries : ' You'll 
get eaten !' 4 We're the beast-tamers !' and so 


 

forth. A little while after that a squad o 
police came into the station, and began t 
clear the public off the platforms, and m 
brother went out into the street again. 

The church bells were ringing for evensong, and a squad of Salvation Army lasses 
came singing down Waterloo Road. On the 
bridge a number of loafers were watching a 
curious brown scum that came drifting down 
the stream in patches. The sun was just 
setting, and the Clock Tower and the Houses 
of Parliament rose against one of the most 
peaceful skies it is possible to imagine, a sky 
of gold, barred with long transverse stripes 
of reddish-purple cloud. There was talk of 
a floating body. One of the men there, a 
reservist he said he was, told my brother 
he had seen the heliograph flickering in the 
west. 

In Wellington Street my brother met a 
couple of sturdy roughs, who had just rushed 
out of Fleet Street with still wet newspapers 
and staring placards. ' Dreadful catastrophe !' 
they bawled one to the other down Wellington 
Street. ' Fighting at Weybridge ! Full description ! Repulse of the Martians ! London 
said to be in danger !' He had to give threepence for a copy of that paper. 






In London 125 

Then it was, and then only, that he realized 
something of the full power and terror of these 
monsters. He learnt that they were not merely 
a handful of small sluggish creatures, but that 
they were minds swaying vast mechanical 
bodies, and that they could move swiftly and 
smite with such power that even the mightiest 
guns could not stand against them. 

They were described as ' vast spider-like 
machines, nearly a hundred feet high, capable 
of the speed of an express train, and able to 
shoot out a beam of intense heat.' Masked 
batteries, chiefly of field-guns, had been planted 
in the country about Horsell Common, and 
especially between the Woking district and 
London. Five of the machines had been seen 
moving towards the Thames, and one, by a 
freak of chance, had been destroyed. In the 
other cases the shells had missed, and the 
batteries had been at once annihilated by the 
Heat- Rays. Heavy losses of soldiers were 
mentioned, but the tone of the despatch was 
optimistic. 

The Martians had been repulsed ; they were 
not invulnerable. They had retreated to their 
triangle of cylinders again, in the circle about 
Woking. Signallers with heliographs were 
pushing forward upon them from all sides. 


 

Guns were in rapid transit from Windsor, 
Portsmouth, Aldershot, Woolwich even froi 
the north ; among others, long wire guns of 
ninety-five tons from Woolwich. Altogethei 
one hundred and sixteen were in position 01 
being hastily laid, chiefly covering London. 
Never before in England had there been sue! 
a vast or rapid concentration of military material. 

Any further cylinders that fell, it was hoped, 
could be destroyed at once by high explosives, 
which were being rapidly manufactured and 
distributed. No doubt, ran the report, the 
situation was of the strangest and gravest 
description, but the public was exhorted to 
avoid and discourage panic. No doubt the 
Martians were strange and terrible in the 
extreme, but at the outside there could not 
be more than twenty of them against our 
millions. 

The authorities had reason to suppose, from 
the size of the cylinders, that at the outside 
there could not be more than five in each 
cylinder fifteen altogether. And one at least 
was disposed of perhaps more. The public 
would be fairly warned of the approach of 
danger, and elaborate measures were being 
taken for the protection of the people in the 
threatened south-western suburbs. And so, 



In London 



127 



with reiterated assurances of the safety of 
London, and the confidence of the authorities 
to cope with the difficulty, this quasi proclamation closed. 

This was printed in enormous type, so fresh 
that the paper was still wet, and there had been 
no time to add a word of comment. It was 
curious, my brother said, to see how ruthlessly 
the other contents of the paper had been hacked 
and taken out to give this place. 

All down Wellington Street, people could be 
seen fluttering out the pink sheets and reading, 
and the Strand was suddenly noisy with the 
voices of an army of hawkers following these 
pioneers. Men came scrambling off buses to 
secure copies. Certainly this news excited 
people intensely, whatever their previous apathy. 
The shutters of a map-shop in the Strand were 
being taken down, my brother said, and a man 
in his Sunday raiment, lemon -yellow gloves 
even, was visible inside the window, hastily 
fastening maps of Surrey to the glass. 

Going on along the Strand to Trafalgar 
Square, the paper in his hand, my brother saw 
some of the fugitives from West Surrey. 
There was a man driving a cart such as greengrocers use, and his wife and two boys and 
some articles of furniture. He was driving 

o 


 

from the direction of Westminster Bridge, and 
close behind him came a hay-waggon with five 
or six respectable-looking people in it, and some 
boxes and bundles. The faces of these people 
were haggard, and their entire appearance contrasted conspicuously with the Sabbath-best 
appearance of the people on the omnibuses. 
People in fashionable clothing peeped at thei 
out of cabs. They stopped at the Square as il 
undecided which way to take, and finally turnec 
eastward along the Strand. Some wa-vt afte 
these came a man in work-day clothes, 'ri 
one of those old-fashioned tricycles with a small 
front- wheel. He was dirty and white in the 
face. 

My brother turned down towards Victoria, 
and met a number of such people. He had 
vague idea that he might see something of 
me. He noticed an unusual number of police 
regulating the traffic. Some of the refugees 
were exchanging news with the people on the 
omnibuses. One was professing to have seei 
the Martians. ' Boilers on stilts, I tell you, 
striding along like men.' Most of them were 
excited and animated by their strange experience. 

Beyond Victoria the public-houses were doinj 
a lively trade with these arrivals. At all the 



In London 129 

street corners groups of people were reading 
papers, talking excitedly, or staring at these 
unusual Sunday visitors. They seemed to 
increase as night drew on, until at last the 
roads, my brother said, were like the Epsom 
High Street on a Derby Day. My brother 
addressed several of these fugitives and got 
unsatisfactory answers from most. 

None of them could tell him any news of 
Woking except one man, who assured him that 
Wokg had been entirely destroyed on the 
previous night. 

' I come from Byfleet,' he said ; ' a man on a 
bicycle came through the place in the early 
morning, and ran from door to door warning us 
to come away. Then came soldiers. We went 
out to look, and there were clouds of smoke to 
the south nothing but smoke, and not a soul 
coming that way. Then we heard the guns at 
Chertsey, and folks coming from Weybridge. 
So I've locked up my house and come on.' 

At that time there was a strong feeling in the 
streets that the authorities were to blame for 
their incapacity to dispose of the invaders without all this inconvenience. 

About eight o'clock, a noise of heavy firing 
was distinctly audible all over the south of 
London. My brother could not hear it for the 

9 


 

traffic in the main streets, but by striking 
through the quiet back-streets to the river he 
was able to distinguish it quite plainly. 

He walked back from Westminster to his 
apartments near Regent's Park about two. He 
was now very anxious on my account, and disturbed at the evident magnitude of the trouble. 
His mind was inclined to run, even as mine 
had run on Saturday, on military details. He 
thought of all those silent expectant guns, 
of the suddenly nomadic countryside ; he tried 
to imagine ' boilers on stilts ' a hundred feet 
high. 

There were one or two cartloads of refugees 
passing along Oxford Street, and several in the 
Marylebone Road, but so slowly was the news 
spreading that Regent Street and Portland 
Road were full of their usual Sunday-night 
promenaders, albeit they talked in groups, and 
along the edge of Regent's Park there were 
as many silent couples ' walking out ' together 
under the scattered gas-lamps as ever there had 
been. The night was warm and still, and a 
little oppressive, the sound of guns continued 
intermittently, and after midnight there seemed 
to be sheet lightning in the south. 

He read and re-read the paper, fearing the 
worst had happened to me. He was restless, 



In London 131 

and after supper prowled out again aimlessly. 
He returned and tried to divert his attention by 
his examination notes in vain. He went to 
bed a little after midnight, and he was awakened 
out of some lurid dreams in the small hours of 
Monday by the sound of door-knockers, feet 
running in the street, distant drumming, and a 
clamour of bells. Red reflections danced on 
the ceiling. For a moment he lay astonished, 
wondering whether day had come or the world 
had gone mad. Then he jumped out of bed 
and ran to the window. 

His room was an attic, and as he thrust his 
head out, up and down the street there were a 
dozen echoes to the noise of his window-sash, 
and heads in every kind of night disarray 
appeared. Inquiries were being shouted. 'They 
are coming!' bawled a policeman, hammering 
at the door ; ' the Martians are coming !' and 
hurried to the next door. 

The noise of drumming and trumpeting came 
from the Albany Street Barracks, and every 
church within earshot was hard at work killing 
sleep with a vehement disorderly tocsin. There 
was a noise of doors opening, and window after 
window in the houses opposite flashed from 
darkness into yellow illumination. 

Up the street came galloping a closed car
92 


 

riage, bursting abruptly into noise at the corner, 
rising to a clattering climax under the window, 
and dying away slowly in the distance. Close 
on the rear of this came a couple of cabs, the 
forerunners of a long procession of flying 
vehicles, going for the most part to Chalk Farm 
Station, where the North- Western special trains 
were loading up, instead of coming down the 
gradient into Euston. 

For a long time my brother stared out of 
the window in blank astonishment, watching 
the policemen hammering at door after door, 
and delivering their incomprehensible message. 
Then the door behind him opened, and the man 
who lodged across the landing came in, dressed 
only in shirt, trousers, and slippers, his braces 
loose about his waist, his hair disordered from 
his pillow. 

' What the devil is it ?' he asked. 'A fire ? 
What a devil of a row !' 

They both craned their heads out of the 
window, straining to hear what the policemen 
were shouting. People were coming out of 
the side-streets, and standing in groups at the 
corners talking. 

' What the devil is it all about ?' said my 
brother's fellow-lodger. 

My brother answered him vaguely and began 



In London 133 

to dress, running with each garment to the 
window in order to miss nothing of the growing 
excitement of the streets. And presently men 
selling unnaturally early newspapers came bawling into the street : 

' London in danger of suffocation ! The 
Kingston and Richmond defences forced ! 
Fearful massacres in the Thames Valley !' 

And all about him in the rooms below, in 
the houses on either side and across the road, 
and behind in the Park Terraces and in the 
hundred other streets of that part of Marylebone, and the Westbourne Park district and 
St. Pancras, and westward and northward in 
Kilburn and St. John's Wood and Hampstead, 
and eastward in Shoreditch.and Highbury and 
Haggerston and Hoxton, and, indeed, through 
all the vastness of London from Ealing to East 
Ham people were rubbing their eyes, and 
opening windows to stare out and ask aimless 
questions, and dressing hastily as the first 
breath of the coming storm of Fear blew 
through the streets. It was the dawn of the 
great panic. London, which had gone to bed 
on Sunday night stupid and inert, was awakened 
in the small hours of Monday morning to a 
vivid sense of danger. 

Unable from his window to learn what was 


 

happening, my brother went down and out into 
the street, just as the sky between the parapets 
of the houses grew pink with the early dawn. 
The flying people on foot and in vehicles grew 
more numerous every moment. ' Black Smoke !' 
he heard people crying, and again ' Black 
Smoke !' The contagion of such a unanimous 
fear was inevitable. As my brother hesitated 
on the doorstep, he saw another newsvendor 
approaching him, and got a copy forthwith. 
The man was running away with the rest, and 
selling his papers as he ran for a shilling each 
a grotesque mingling of profit and panic. 

And from this paper my brother read that 
catastrophic despatch of the Commander-inChief : 

' The Martians are able to discharge enormous 
clouds of a black and poisonous vapour by 
means of rockets. They have smothered our 
batteries, destroyed Richmond, Kingston, and 
Wimbledon, and are advancing slowly towards 
London, destroying everything on the way. It 
is impossible to stop them. There is no safety 
from the Black Smoke but in instant flight.' 

That was all, but it was enough. The whole 
population of the great six-million city was 



In London 137 

stirring, slipping, running ; presently it woulcre 
be pouring en masse northward. 

' Black Smoke !' the voices cried. ' Fire !' 

The bells of the neighbouring church made 
a jangling tumult, a cart carelessly driven 
smashed amidst shrieks and curses against the 
water-trough up the street. Sickly yellow light 
went to and fro in the houses, and some of the 
passing cabs flaunted unextinguished lamps. 
And overhead the dawn was growing brighter, 
clear and steady and calm. 

He heard footsteps running to and fro in the 
rooms, and up and down stairs behind him. 
His landlady came to the door, loosely wrapped 
in dressing-gown and shawl ; her husband followed, ejaculating. 

As my brother began to realize the import of 
all these things, he turned hastily to his own 
room, put all his available money some ten 
pounds altogether into his pockets, and went 
out again into the streets. 



'34 



XV. 

WHAT HAD HAPPENED IN SURREY. 

IT was while the curate had sat and talked so 
wildly to me under the hedge in the flat 
meadows near Halliford, and while my brother 
was watching the fugitives stream over Westminster Bridge, that the Martians had resumed 
the offensive. So far as one can ascertain from 
the conflicting accounts that have been put 
forth, the majority of them remained busied 
with preparations in the Horsell pit until nine 
that night, hurrying on some operation that disengaged huge volumes of green smoke. 

But three certainly came out about eight 
o'clock, and, advancing slowly and cautiously, 
made their way through Byfleet and Pyrford 
towards Ripley and Weybridge, and so came in 
sight of the expectant batteries against the 
setting sun. These Martians did not advance 
in a body, but in a line, each perhaps a mile and 
a half from his nearest fellow. They communicated with each other by means of siren-like 



What had happened in Surrey 137 

howls, running up and down the scale from one 
note to another. 

It was this howling and the firing of the guns 
at Ripley and St. George's Hill that we had 
heard at Upper Halliford. The Ripley gunners, 
unseasoned artillery volunteers who ought never 
to have been placed in such a position, fired one 
wild, premature, ineffectual volley, and bolted 
on horse and foot through the deserted village, 
and the Martian walked over their guns serenely 
without using his Heat-Ray, stepped gingerly 
among them, passed in front of them, and so 
came unexpectedly upon the guns in Painshill 
Park, which he destroyed. 

The St. George's Hill men, however, were 
better led or of a better mettle. Hidden by a 
pine-wood as they were, they seem to have 
been quite unexpected by the Martian nearest 
to them. They laid their guns as deliberately 
as if they had been on parade, and fired at about 
a thousand yards' range. 

The shells flashed all round the Martian, and 
they saw him advance a few paces, stagger, and 
go down. Everybody yelled together, and the 
guns were reloaded in frantic haste. The 
overthrown Martian set up a prolonged ululation, and immediately a second glittering giant, 
answering him, appeared over the trees to the 



 

south. It would seem that a leg of the tripod 
had been smashed by one of the shells. The 
whole of the second volley flew wide of the 
Martian on the ground, and simultaneously 
both his companions brought their Heat- Rays 
to bear on the battery. The ammunition blew 
up, the pine-trees all about the guns flashed 
into fire, and only one or two of the men who 
were already running over the crest of the hill 
escaped. 

After this it would seem that the three took 
counsel together and halted, and the scouts who 
were watching them report that they remained 
absolutely stationary for the next half-hour. 
The Martian who had been overthrown crawled 
tediously out of his hood, a small brown figure, 
oddly suggestive from that distance of a speck 
of blight, and apparently engaged in the repair 
of his support. About nine he had finished, 
for his cowl was then seen above the trees 
again. 

It was a few minutes past nine that night 
when these three sentinels were joined by four 
other Martians, each carrying a thick black 
tube. A similar tube was handed to each 
of the three, and the seven proceeded to distribute themselves at equal distances along a 
curved line between St. George's Hill, Wey


What had happened in Surrey 1 39 

bridge, and the village of Send, south-west of 
Ripley. 

A dozen rockets sprang out of the hills before 
them so soon as they began to move, and warned 
the waiting batteries about Ditton and Esher. 
At the same time four of their Fighting Machines, 
similarly armed with tubes, crossed the river, 
and two of them, black against the western sky, 
came into sight of myself and the curate as we 
hurried wearily and painfully along the road 
that runs northward out of Halliford. They 
moved, as it seemed to us, upon a cloud, for 
i milky mist covered the fields and rose to a 
nird of their height. 

At this sight the curate cried faintly in his 
throat, and began running ; but I knew it was 
no good running from a Martian, and I turned 
aside and crawled through dewy nettles and 
brambles into the broad ditch by the side of 
the road. He looked back, saw what I was 
doing, and turned to join me. 

The two Martians halted, the nearer to us 
standing and facing Sunbury, the remoter being 
a gray indistinctness towards the evening star, 
away towards Staines. 

The occasional howling of the Martians had 
ceased ; they took up their positions in the 
huge crescent about their cylinders in absolute 

 

silence. It was a crescent with twelve miles 
between its horns. Never since the devising 
of gunpowder was the beginning of a battle so 
still. To us and to an observer about Ripley 
it would have had precisely the same effect 
the Martians seemed in solitary possession of 
the darkling night, lit only as it was by the 
slender moon, the stars, the after-glow of the 
daylight, and the ruddy glare from St. George's 
Hill and the woods of Painshill. 

But facing that crescent everywhere, at 
Staines, Hounslow, Ditton, Esher, Ockham, 
behind hills and woods south of the river, and 
across the flat grass meadows to the north of it, 
wherever a cluster of trees or village houses 
gave sufficient cover, the guns were waiting. 
The signal rockets burst and rained their sparks 
through the night and vanished, and the spirit 
of all those watching batteries rose to a tense 
expectation. The Martians had but to advance 
into the line of fire, and instantly those motionless black forms of men, those guns glittering 
so darkly in the early night, would explode into 
a thunderous fury of battle. 

No doubt the thought that was uppermost in 
a thousand of those vigilant minds, even as it 
was uppermost in mine, was the riddle how 
much they understood of us. Did they grasp 



What had happened in Surrey 141 

that we in our millions were organized, disciplined, working together ? Or did they interpret our spurts of fire, the sudden stinging of 
our shells, our steady investment of their 
encampment, as we should the furious unanimity 
of onslaught in a disturbed hive of bees ? Did 
they dream they might exterminate us ? (At 
that time no one knew what food they needed.) 
A hundred such questions struggled together in 
my mind as I watched that vast sentinel shape. 
And in the back of my mind was the sense 
of all the huge unknown and hidden forces 
London ward. Had they prepared pitfalls ? 
Were the powder-mills at Hounslow ready as a 
snare ? Would the Londoners have the heart 
and courage to make a greater Moscow of their 
mighty province of houses ? 

Then, after an interminable time as it seemed 
to us, crouching and peering through the hedge, 
came a sound like the distant concussion of a 
gun. Another nearer, and then another. And 
then the Martian beside us raised his tube on 
high and discharged it gunwise, with a heavy 
''report that made the ground heave. The 
Martian towards Staines answered him. There 
was no flash, no smoke, simply that loaded 
detonation. 

I was so excited by these heavy minute-guns 

 

following one another that I so far forgot my 
personal safety and my scalded hands as to 
clamber up into the hedge and stare towards 
Sunbury. As I did so a second report followed, 
and a big projectile hurtled overhead towards 
Hounslow. I expected at least to see smoke 
or fire or some such evidence of its work. But 
all I saw was the deep-blue sky above, with one 
solitary star, and the white mist spreading wide 
and low beneath. And there had been no 
crash, no answering explosion. The silence 
was restored ; the minute lengthened to three. 

' What has happened ?' said the curate, standing up beside me. 

' Heaven knows !' said I. 

A bat flickered by and vanished. A distant 
tumult of shouting began and ceased. I looked 
again at the Martian, and saw he was now 
moving eastward along the river-bank, with a 
swift rolling motion. 

Every moment I expected the fire of some 
hidden battery to spring upon him ; but the 
evening calm was unbroken. The figure of the 
Martian grew smaller as he receded, and 
presently the mist and the gathering night had 
swallowed him up. By a common impulse we 
clambered higher. Towards Sunbury was a 
dark appearance, as though a conical hill had 



What had happened in Surrey 143 

suddenly come into being there, hiding our 
view of the further country ; and then, remoter 
across the river, over Walton, we saw another 
such summit. These hill-like forms grew lower 
and broader even as we stared. 

Moved by a sudden thought, I looked northward, and there I perceived a third of these 
cloudy black kopjes had arisen. 

Everything had suddenly become very still. 
Far away to the south-east, marking the quiet, 
we heard the Martians hooting to one another, 
and then the air quivered again with the distant 
thud of their guns. But the earthly artillery 
made no reply. 

Now, at the time we could not understand 
these things ; but later I was to learn the meaning of these ominous kopjes that gathered in 
the twilight. Each of the Martians, standing 
in the great crescent I have described, had discharged at some unknown signal, by means of 
the gun-like tube he carried, a huge canister 
over whatever hill, copse, cluster of houses, or 
other possible cover for guns, chanced to be in 
-front of him. Some fired only one of these, 
some two, as in the case of the one we had 
seen ; the one at Ripley is said to have discharged no fewer than five at that time. These 
canisters smashed on striking the ground they 

 

did not explode and incontinently disengaged 
an enormous volume of a heavy inky vapour, 
coiling and pouring upwards in a huge and 
ebony cumulus cloud, a gaseous hill that sank 
and spread itself slowly over the surrounding 
country. And the touch of that vapour, the inhaling of its pungent wisps, was death to all 
that breathes. 

It was heavy, this vapour, heavier than the 
densest smoke, so that, after the first tumultuous 
uprush and outflow of its impact, it sank down 
through the air and poured over the ground in 
a manner rather liquid than gaseous, abandoning the hills, and streaming into the valleys and 
ditches and water-courses'even as I have heard 
the carbonic acid gas that pours from volcanic 
clefts is wont to do. And where it came upon 
water some chemical action occurred, and the 
surface would be instantly covered with a 
powdery scum that sank slowly and made way 
for more. The scum was absolutely insoluble, 
and it is a strange thing, seeing the instant 
effect of the gas, that one could drink the water 
from which it had been strained without hurt. 
The vapour did not diffuse as a true gas would 
do. It hung together in banks, flowing sluggishly down the slope of the land and driving 
reluctantly before the wind, and very slowly it 



What had happened in Surrey 145 

combined with the mist and moisture of the air, 
and sank to the earth in the form of dust. 
Save that an unknown element giving a group 
of four lines in the blue of the spectrum is concerned, we are still entirely ignorant of the 
nature of this substance. 

Once the tumultuous upheaval of its dispersion was over, the black smoke clung so closely 
to the ground, even before its precipitation, 
that, fifty feet up in the air, on the roofs and 
upper stories of high houses and on great trees, 
there was a chance of escaping its poison 
altogether, as was proved even that night at 
Street Cobham and Ditton. 

The man who escaped at the former place 
tells a wonderful story of the strangeness of its 
coiling flow, and how he looked down from the 
church spire and saw the houses of the village 
rising like ghosts out of its inky nothingness. 
For a day and a half he remained there, weary, 
starving, and sun-scorched, the earth under the 
blue sky and against the prospect of the distant 
hills a velvet black expanse, with red roofs, 
green trees, and, later, black-veiled shrubs and 
gates, barns, outhouses, and walls, rising here 
and there into the sunlight. 

But that was at Street Cobham, where the 
black vapour was allowed to remain until it 

10 

 

sank of its own accord into the ground. As a 

o 

rule, the Martians, when it had served its 
purpose, cleared the air of it agaki by wading 
into it and directing a jet of steam upon it. 

That they did with the vapour-banks near 
us, as we saw in the starlight from the window 
of a deserted house at Upper Halliford, whither 
we had returned. From there we could see 
the searchlights on Richmond Hill and Kingston Hill going to and fro, and about eleven 
the window rattled, and we heard the sound of 
the huge siege guns that had been put in position there. These continued intermittently for 
the space of a quarter of an hour, sending 
chance shots at the invisible Martians at 
Hampton and Ditton, and then the pale beams 
of the electric light vanished, and were replaced 
by a bright red glow. 

Then the fourth cylinder fell a brilliant 
green meteor as I learnt afterwards, in 
Bushey Park. Before the guns on the Richmond and Kingston line of hills began, there 
was a fitful cannonade far away in the southwest, due, I believe, to guns being fired haphazard before the black vapour could overwhelm 
the gunners. 

So, setting about it as methodically as men 
might smoke out a wasps' nest, the Martians 



What had happened in Surrey 147 

spread this strange stifling vapour over the 
Londonward country. The horns of the 
crescent slowly spread apart, until at last they 
formed a line from Han well to Coombe and 
Maiden. All night through their destructive 
tubes advanced. Never once, after the Martian 
at St. George's Hill was brought down, did they 
give the artillery the ghost of a chance against 
them. Wherever there was a possibility of 
guns being laid for them unseen, a fresh canister 
of the black vapour was discharged, and where 
the guns were openly displayed the Heat- Ray 
was brought to bear. 

By midnight the blazing trees along the 
slopes of Richmond Park, and the glare of 
Kingston Hill, threw their light upon a network of black smoke, blotting out the whole 
Valley of the Thames, and extending as far as 
the eye could reach. And through this two 
Martians slowly waded, and turned their hissing 
steam -jets this way and that. 

The Martians were sparing of the Heat- Ray 
that night, either because they had but a limited 
supply of material for its production, or because 
they did not wish to destroy the country, but 
only to crush and overawe the opposition they 
had aroused. In the latter aim they certainly 
succeeded. Sunday night was the end of the 

10 2 

 

organized opposition to their movements. After 
that no body of men could stand against them, 
so hopeless was the enterprise. Even the 
crews of the torpedo boats and destroyers that 
had brought their quick-firers up the Thames 
refused to stop, mutinied, and went down again. 
The only offensive operation men ventured 
upon after that night was the preparation of 
mines and pitfalls, and even in that men's 
energies were frantic and spasmodic. 

One has to imagine the fate of those batteries 
towards Esher, waiting so tensely in the twilight, 
as well as one may. Survivors there were none. 
One may picture the orderly expectation, the 
officers alert and watchful, the gunners ready, 
the ammunition piled to hand, the limber gunners with their horses and waggons, the groups 
of civilian spectators standing as near as they 
were permitted, the evening stillness ; the 
ambulances and hospital tents, with the burnt 
and wounded from Weybridge ; then the dull 
resonance of the shots the Martians fired, and 
the clumsy projectile whirling over the trees 
and houses, and smashing amidst the neighbouring fields. 

One may picture, too, the sudden shifting of 
the attention, the swiftly spreading coils and 
bellyings of that blackness advancing head


What had happened in Surrey 149 

long, towering heavenward, turning the twilight 
to a palpable darkness, a strange and horrible 
antagonist of vapour striding upon its victims, 
men and horses near it seen dimly, running, 
shrieking, falling headlong, shouts of dismay, 
the guns suddenly abandoned, men choking 
and writhing on the ground, and the swift 
broadening out of the opaque cone of smoke. 
And then, night and extinction nothing but 
a silent mass of impenetrable vapour hiding 
its dead. 

Before dawn the black vapour was pouring 
through the streets of Richmond, and the disintegrating organism of government was, with 
a last expiring effort, rousing the population of 
London to the necessity of flight. 



XVI. 

THE EXODUS FROM LONDON. 

So you understand the roaring wave of fear 
that swept through the greatest city in the 
world just as Monday was dawning the stream 
of flight rising swiftly to a torrent, lashing in a 
foaming tumult round the railway - stations, 
banked up into a horrible struggle about the 
shipping in the Thames, and hurrying by 
every available channel northward and eastward. By ten o'clock the police organization, and by mid-day even the railway organizations, were losing coherency, losing 
shape and efficiency,' guttering, softening, running at last in that swift liquefaction of the 
social body. 

All the railway lines north of the Thames 
and the South - Eastern people at Cannon 
Street had been warned by midnight on Sunday, and trains were being filled, people were 
fighting savagely for standing - room in the 
carriages, even at two o'clock. By three people 



The Exodus from London 151 

were being trampled and crushed even in 
Bishopsgate Street ; a couple of hundred yards 
or more from Liverpool Street Station revolvers 
were fired, people stabbed, and the policemen who had been sent to direct the traffic, 
exhausted and infuriated, were breaking the 
heads of the people they were called out to 
protect. 

And as the day advanced and the enginedrivers and stokers refused to return to London, 
the pressure of the flight drove the people in 
an ever-thickening multitude away from the 
stations and along the northward-running roads. 
By mid-day a Martian had been seen at Barnes, 
and a cloud of slowly sinking black vapour 
drove along the Thames and across the flats of 
Lambeth, cutting off all escape over the bridges 
in its sluggish advance. Another bank drove 
over Ealing, and surrounded a little island of 
survivors on Castle Hill, alive, but unable to 
escape. 

After a fruitless struggle to get aboard 
a North-Western train at Chalk Farm the 
engines of the trains that had loaded in the 
goods yard there ploughed through shrieking 
people, and a dozen stalwart men fought to 
keep the crowd from crushing the driver 
against his furnace my brother emerged upon 

 

the Chalk Farm Road, dodged across through 
a hurrying swarm of vehicles, and had the luck 
to be foremost in the sack of a cycle shop. The 
front tyre of the machine he got was punctured 
in dragging it through the window, but he got 
up and off, notwithstanding, with no further 
injury than a cut wrist. The steep foot of 
Haverstock Hill was impassable owing to 
several overturned horses, and my brother 
struck into Belsize Road. 

So he got out of the fury of the panic, and, 
skirting the Edgware Road, reached Edgware 
about seven, fasting and wearied, but well 
ahead of the crowd. Along the road people 
were standing in the roadway curious, wondering. He was passed by a number of cyclists, 
some horsemen, and two motor-cars. A mile 
from Edgware the rim of the wheel broke, and 
the machine became unrideable. He left it by 
the roadside and trudged through the village. 
There were shops half opened in the main 
street of the place, and people crowded on the 
pavement and in the doorways and windows, 
staring astonished at this extraordinary procession of fugitives that was beginning. He succeeded in getting some food at an inn. 

For a time he remained in Edgware, not 
knowing what next to do. The flying people 



The Exodus from London 153 

increased in number. Many of them, like 
my brother, seemed inclined to stop in the 
place. There was no fresh news of the invaders from Mars. 

At that time the road was crowded, but as 
yet far from congested. Most of the fugitives 
at that hour were mounted on cycles, but there 
were soon motor - cars, hansom cabs, and 
carriages hurrying along, and the dust hung in 
heavy clouds along the road to St. Albans. 

It was perhaps a vague idea of making his way 
to Chelmsford, where some friends of his lived, 
that at last induced my brother to strike into a 
quiet lane running eastward. Presently he came 
upon a stile, and, crossing it, followed a footpath north-eastward. He passed near several 
farm-houses and some little places whose names 
he did not learn. He saw few fugitives until, 
in a grass lane towards High Barnet, he happened upon the two ladies who became his 
fellow-travellers. He came upon them just in 
time to save them. 

He heard their screams, and, hurrying round 
the corner, saw a couple of men struggling to 
drag them out of the little pony-chaise in which 
they had been driving, while a third with difficulty held the frightened pony's head. One of 
the ladies, a short woman dressed in white, was 


 

simply screaming ; the other, a dark, slender 
figure, slashed at the man who gripped her 
arm with a whip she held in her disengaged 
hand. 

My brother immediately grasped the situation, shouted, and hurried towards the struggle. 
One of the men desisted and turned towards 
him, and my brother, realizing from his antagonist's face that a fight was unavoidable, and 
being an expert boxer, went into him forthwith, 
and sent him down against the wheel of the 
chaise. 

It was no time for pugilistic chivalry, and my 
brother laid him quiet with a kick, and gripped 
the collar of the man who pulled at the slender 
lady's arm. He heard the clatter of hoofs, the 
whip stung across his face, a third antagonist 
struck him between the eyes, and the man he 
held wrenched himself free and made off down 
the lane in the direction from which he had 
come. 

Partly stunned, he found himself facing the 
man who had held the horse's head, and became 
aware of the chaise receding from him down 
the lane, swaying from side to side and with 
the women in it looking back. The man before 
him, a burly rough, tried to close, and he 
stopped him with a blow in the face. Then, 



The Exodus from London 155 

realizing that he was deserted, he dodged round 
and made off down the lane after the chaise, 
with the sturdy man close behind him, and the 
fugitive, who had turned now, following remotely. 

Suddenly he stumbled and fell : his immediate pursuer went headlong, and he rose to his 
feet to find himself with a couple of antagonists 
again. He would have had little chance against 
them had not the slender lady very pluckily 
pulled up and returned to his help. It seems 
she had had a revolver all this time, but it 
had been under the seat when she and her 
companion were attacked. She fired at six 
yards' distance, narrowly missing my brother. 
The less courageous of the robbers made off, 
and his companion followed him, cursing 
his cowardice. They both stopped in sight 
down the lane, where the third man lay insensible. 

' Take this !' said the slender lady, and gave 
my brother her revolver. 

' Go back to the chaise,' said my brother, 
wiping the blood from his split lip. 

She turned without a word they were both 
panting and they went back to where the 
lady in white struggled to hold back the frightened pony. 


 

The robbers had evidently had enough of it. 
When my brother looked again they were 
retreating. 

' I'll sit here said my brother, ' if I may ;' 
and he got up on the empty front-seat. The 
lady looked over her shoulder. 

'Give me the reins she said, and laid the 
whip along the pony's side. In another 
moment a bend in the road hid the three men 
from my brother's eyes. 

So, quite unexpectedly, my brother found 
himself, panting, with a cut mouth, a bruised 
jaw and blood-stained knuckles, driving along 
an unknown lane with these two women. 

He learnt they were the wife and the younger 
sister of a surgeon living at Stanmore, who had 
come in the small hours from a dangerous case 
at Pinner, and heard at some railway-station on 
his way of the Martian advance. He had 
hurried home, roused the women their servant 
had left them two days before packed some 
provisions, put his revolver under the seat 
luckily for my brother and told them to 
drive on to Edgware, with the idea of getting 
a train there. He stopped behind to tell 
the neighbours. He would overtake them, he 
said, at about half-past four in the morning, 
and now it was nearly nine and they had seen 






The Exodus from London 157 

nothing of him since. They could not stop in 
Edgware because of the growing traffic through 
the place, and so they had come into this sidelane. 

That was the story they told my brother in 
fragments when presently they stopped again, 
nearer to New Barnet. He promised to stay 
with them at least until they could determine 
what to do, or until the missing man arrived, 
and professed to be an expert shot with the 
revolver a weapon strange to him in order 
to give them confidence. 

They made a sort of encampment by the wayside, and the pony became happy in the hedge. 
He told them of his own escape out of London, 
and all that he knew of these Martians and 
their ways. The sun crept higher in the sky, 
and after a time their talk died out and gave place 
to an uneasy state of anticipation. Several wayfarers came along the lane, and of these my 
brother gathered such news as he could. Every 
broken answer he had deepened his impression 
of the great disaster that had come on humanity, 
'deepened his persuasion of the immediate necessity for prosecuting this flight. He urged the 
matter upon them. 

' We have money,' said the slender woman, 
and hesitated. 



 

Her eyes met my brother's and her hesitation ended. 

' So have I,' said my brother. 

She explained that they had as much as thirty 
pounds in gold besides a five-pound note, and 
suggested that with that they might get upon 
a train at St. Albans or New Barnet. My 
brother thought that was hopeless, seeing the 
fury of the Londoners to crowd upon the 
trains, and broached his own idea of striking 
across Essex towards Harwich and thence 
escaping from the country altogether. 

Mrs. Elphinstone that was the name of the 
woman in white would listen to no reasoning, 
and kept calling upon ' George ;' but her sisterin-law was astonishingly quiet and deliberate, 
and at last agreed to my brother's suggestion. 
So they went on towards Barnet, designing to 
cross the Great North Road, my brother 
leading the pony to save it as much as 
possible. 

As the sun crept up the sky the day 
became excessively hot, and under foot a thick 
whitish sand grew burning and blinding, so that 
they travelled only very slowly. The hedges 
were gray with dust. And as they advanced 
towards Barnet, a tumultuous murmuring grew 
stronger. 






The Exodus from London 159 

They began to meet more people. For the 
most part these were staring before them, 
murmuring indistinct questions, jaded, haggard, 
unclean. One man in evening dress passed 
them on foot, his eyes on the ground. They 
heard his voice, and, looking back at him, saw 
one hand clutched in his hair and the other 
beating invisible things. His paroxysm of 
rage over, he went on his way without once 
looking back. 

As my brother's party went on towards the 
cross-roads to the south of Barnet, they saw a 
woman approaching the road across some 
fields on their left, carrying a child and with 
two other children, and then a man in dirty 
black, with a thick stick in one hand and a 
small portmanteau in the other, passed. Then 
round the corner of the lane, from between 
the villas that guarded it at its confluence with 
the highroad, came a little cart drawn by a 
sweating black pony and driven by a sallow 
youth in a bowler hat, gray with dust. There 
were three girls like East End factory girls, 
and a couple of little children, crowded in the 
cart. 

' This'll tike us rahnd Edgware ?' asked the 
driver, wild-eyed, white-faced ; and when my 
brother told him it would if he turned to the 

 

left, he whipped up at once without the formality 
of thanks. 

My brother noticed a pale gray smoke or 
haze rising among the houses in front of them, 
and veiling the white faade of a terrace beyond 
the road that appeared between the backs of the 
villas. Mrs. Elphinstone suddenly cried out at a 
number of tongues of smoky red flame leaping 
up above the houses in front of them against 
the hot blue sky. The tumultuous noise 
resolved itself now into the disorderly mingling 
of many voices, the gride of many wheels, the 
creaking of waggons, and the staccato of hoofs. 
The lane came round sharply not fifty yards 
from the cross-roads. 

' Good heavens !' cried Mrs. Elphinstone. 
' What is this you are driving us into ?' 

My brother stopped. 

Forthe main road was a boiling stream ol 
people, a torrent of human beings rushing 
northward, one pressing on another. A great 
bank of dust, white and luminous in the blaze 
of the sun, made everything within twenty feet 
of the ground gray and indistinct, and was perpetually renewed by the hurrying feet of a 
dense crowd of horses and men and women on 
foot, and by the wheels of vehicles of every 
description 



The Exodus from London 161 

' Way !' my brother heard voices crying. 
' Make way !' 

It was like riding into the smoke of a fire to 
approach the meeting-point of the lane and 
road; the crowd roared like a fire, and the dust 
was hot and pungent. And, indeed, a little 
way up the road a villa was burning and sending rolling masses of black smoke across the 
road to add to the confusion. 

Two men came past them. Then a dirty 
woman carrying a heavy bundle and weeping. 
A lost retriever dog with hanging tongue circled 
dubiously round them, scared and wretched, and 
fled at my brother's threat. 

So much as they could see of the road 
Londonward between the houses to the right, 
was a tumultuous stream of dirty, hurrying 
people pent in between the villas on either 
side ; the black heads, the crowded forms, 
grew into distinctness as they rushed towards 
the corner, hurried past, and merged their 
individuality again in a receding multitude 
that was swallowed up at last in a cloud of 
jdust. 

' Go on ! Go on !' cried the voices. ' Way ! 
Way!' 

One man's hands pressed on the back of 
another. My brother stood at the pony's head. 

ii 


 

irresistibly attracted, he advanced slowly, pace 
by pace, down the lane. 

Edgware had been a scene of confusion, 
Chalk Farm a riotous tumult, but this was a 
whole population in movement. It is hard to 
imagine that host. It had no character of its 
own. The figures poured out past the corner, 
and receded with their backs to the group in 
the lane. Along the margin came those who 
were on foot, threatened by the wheels, stumbling in the ditches, blundering into one 
another. 

The carts and carnages crowded close upon 
one another, making little way for those swifter 
and more impatient vehicles that darted forward 
every now and then when an opportunity 
showed itself of doing so, sending the people 
scattering against the fences and gates of the 
villas. 

' Push on !' was the cry. ' Push on ! they are 
coming !' 

In one cart stood a blind man in the uniform 
of the Salvation Army, gesticulating with his 
crooked fingers and bawling, 'Eternity! eternity!' 
His voice was hoarse and very loud, so that my 
brother could hear him long after he was lost to 
sight in the southward dust. Some of the 
people who crowded in the carts whipped 



The Exodus from London 163 

stupidly at their horses and quarrelled with 
other drivers ; some sat motionless, staring at 
nothing with miserable eyes ; some gnawed 
their hands with thirst or lay prostrate in the 
bottoms of their conveyances. The horses' bits 
were covered with foam, their eyes bloodshot. 

There were cabs, carriages, shop - carts, 
waggons, beyond counting ; a mail-cart, a roadcleaner's cart marked ' Vestry of St. Pancras,' a 
huge timber-waggon crowded with roughs. A 
brewer's dray rumbled by with its two near 
wheels splashed with recent blood. 

' Clear the way !' cried the voices. ' Clear 
the way !' 

' Eter nity ! eter nity !' came echoing up 
the road. 

There were sad, haggard women tramping 
by, well dressed, with children that cried and 
stumbled, their dainty clothes smothered in 
dust, their weary faces smeared with tears. 
With many of these came men, sometimes helpful, sometimes lowering and savage. Fighting 
side by side with them pushed some weary 
street outcast in faded black rags, wide-eyed, 
loud-voiced, and foul-mouthed. There were 
sturdy workmen thrusting their way along, 
wretched unkempt men clothed like clerks or 
shopmen, struggling spasmodically, a wounded 

II 2 


 

soldier my brother noticed, men dressed in the 
clothes of railway porters, one wretched 
creature in a night-shirt with a coat thrown 
over it. 

But, varied as its composition was, certain 
things all that host had in common. There 
was fear and pain on their faces, and fear 
behind them. A tumult up the road, a quarrel 
for a place in a waggon, sent the whole host of 
them quickening their pace ; even a man so 
scared and broken that his knees bent under 
him was galvanized for a moment into renewed 
activity. The heat and dust had already been 
at work upon this multitude. Their skins were 
dry, their lips black and cracked. They were 
all thirsty, weary, and footsore. And amid the 
various cries one heard disputes, reproaches, 
groans of weariness and fatigue ; the voices of 
most of them were hoarse and weak. Through 
it all ran a refrain : 

' Way ! way ! The Martians are coming !' 
Few stopped and came aside from that flood. 
The lane opened slantingly into the main road 
with a narrow opening, and had a delusive 
appearance of coming from the direction of 
London. Yet a kind of eddy of people drove 
into its mouth ; weaklings elbowed out of the 
stream, who for the most part rested but a 



The Exodus from London 165 

moment before plunging into it again. A little 
way down the lane, with two friends bending 
over him, lay a man with a bare leg, wrapped 
about with bloody rags. He was a lucky man 
to have friends. 

A little old man, with a gray military moustache and a filthy black frock-coat, limped out 
and sat down beside the trap, removed his boot 
his sock was blood-stained shook out a 
pebble, and hobbled on again ; and then a 
little girl of eight or nine, all alone, threw 
herself under the hedge close by my brother, 
weeping. 

' I can't go on ! I can't go on !' 

My brother woke from his torpor of astonishment, and lifted her up, speaking gently to her, 
and carried her to Miss Elphinstone. So soon 
as my brother touched her she became quite 
still, as if frightened. 

' Ellen !' shrieked a woman in the crowd, 
with tears in her voice. ' Ellen !' And the 
child suddenly darted away from my brother, 
crying : ' Mother !' 

' They are coming,' said a man on horseback, 
riding past along the lane. 

1 Out of the way, there !' bawled a coachman, 
towering high ; and my brother saw a closed 
carriage turning into the lane. 


 

The people crushed back on one another to 
avoid the horse. My brother pushed the pony 
and chaise back into the hedge, and the man 
drove by and stopped at the turn of the way. It 
was a carriage, with a pole for a pair of horses, 
but only one was in the traces. 

My brother saw dimly through the dust that 
two men lifted out something on a white 
stretcher, and put this gently on the grass 
beneath the privet hedge. 

One of the men came running to my 
brother. 

' Where is there any water ?' he said. ' He 
is dying fast, and very thirsty. It is Lord 
Garrick.' 

4 Lord Garrick !' said my brother, ' the Chief 
Justice ?' 

' The water ?' he said. 

' There may be a tap,' said my brother, ' in 
some of the houses. We have no water. I 
dare not leave my people.' 

The man pushed against the crowd towards 
the gate of the corner house. 

' Go on !' said the people, thrusting at him. 
' They are coming ! Go on !' 

Then my brother's attention was distracted 
by a bearded, eagle-faced man lugging a small 
hand-bag, which split even as my brother's eyes 






The Exodus from London 167 

rested on it, and disgorged a mass of sovereigns 
that seemed to break up into separate coins as 
it struck the ground. They rolled hither and 
thither among the struggling feet of men and 
horses. The man stopped, and looked stupidly 
at the heap, and the shaft of a cab struck his 
shoulder and sent him reeling. He gave a 
shriek and dodged back, and a cartwheel shaved 
him narrowly. 

' Way !' cried the men all about him. ' Make 
way !' 

So soon as the cab had passed, he flung himself, with both hands open, upon the heap of 
coins, and began clutching handfuls in his 
pockets. A horse rose close upon him, and in 
another moment he had half risen, and had 
been borne down under the horse's hoofs. 

' Stop !' screamed my brother, and, pushing a 
woman out of his way, tried to clutch the bit of 
the horse. 

Before he could get to it, he heard a scream 
under the wheels, and saw through the dust the 
rim passing over the poor wretch's back. The 
driver of the cart slashed his whip at my 
brother, who ran round behind the cart. The 
multitudinous shouting confused his ears. The 
man was writhing in the dust among his scattered 
money, unable to rise, for the wheel had broken 


 

his back, and his lower limbs lay limp and dead. 
My brother stood up and yelled at the next 
driver, and a man on a black horse came to his 
assistance. 

' Get him out of the road,' said he ; and, 
clutching the man's collar with his free hand, 
my brother lugged him sideways. But he still 
clutched after his money, and regarded my 
brother fiercely, hammering at his arm with a 
handful of gold. ' Go on ! Go on !' shouted 
angry voices behind. ' Way ! Way !' 

There was a smash as the pole of a carriage 
crashed into the cart that the man on horseback 
stopped. My brother looked up, and the man 
with the gold twisted his head round and bit 
the wrist that held his collar. There was a 
concussion, and the black horse came staggering sideways, and the cart-horse pushed beside 
it. A hoof missed my brother's foot by a hair's 
breadth. He released his grip on the fallen 
man and jumped back. He saw anger change 
to terror on the face of the poor wretch on the 
ground, and in a moment he was hidden and 
my brother was borne backward and carried past 
the entrance of the lane, and had to fight hard 
in the torrent to recover it. 

He saw Miss Elphinstone covering her eyes, 
and a little child, with all a child's want of 



The Exodus from London 169 

sympathetic imagination, staring with dilated 
eyes at a dusty something that lay black and 
still, ground and crushed under the rolling 
wheels. ' Let us go back !' he shouted, and 
began turning the pony round. ' We cannot 
cross this hell,' he said ; and they went back 
a hundred yards the way they had come, until 
the fighting crowd was hidden. As they passed 
the bend in the lane, my brother saw the face 
of the dying man in the ditch under the privet, 
deadly white and drawn, and shining with perspiration. The two women sat silent, crouching 
in their seats and shivering. 

Then beyond the bend my brother stopped 
again. Miss Elphinstone was white and 
pale, and her sister-in-law sat weeping, too 
wretched even to call upon ' George.' My 
brother was horrified and perplexed. So soon 
as they had retreated, he realized how urgent 
and unavoidable it was to attempt this crossing. He turned to Miss Elphinstone suddenly, 
resolute. 

' We must gel that way,' he said, and led 
the pony round again. 

For the second time that day this girl proved 
her quality. To force their way into the torrent of people, my brother plunged into the 
traffic and held back a cab-horse, while she 

 

drove the pony across its head. A waggon 
locked wheels for a moment, and ripped a 
long splinter from the chaise. In another 
moment they were caught and swept forward 
by the stream. My brother, with the cabman's 
whip-marks red across his face and hands, 
scrambled into the chaise, and took the reins 
from her. 

' Point the revolver at the man behind he 
said, giving it to her, 'if he presses us too 
hard. No ! point it at his horse.' 

Then he began to look out for a chance 
of edging to the right across the road. But 
once in the stream, he seemed to lose volition, 
to become a part of that dusty rout. They 
swept through Chipping Barnet with the torrent ; they were nearly a mile beyond the 
centre of the town before they had fought 
across to the opposite side of the way. It was 
din and confusion indescribable ; but in and 
beyond the town the road forks repeatedly, and 
this to some extent relieved the stress. 

They struck eastward through Hadley, and 
there on either side of the road, and at another 
place further on, they came upon a great multitude of people drinking at the stream, some 
fighting to come at the water. And further on, 
from a hill near East Barnet, they saw tw( 



The Exodus from London 171 

trains running slowly one after the other without signal or order trains swarming with 
people, with men even among the coals behind 
the engines going northward along the Great 
Northern Railway. My brother supposes they 
must have filled outside London, for at that 
time the .furious terror of the people had 
rendered the central termini impossible. 

Near this place they halted for the rest of 
the afternoon, for the violence of the day had 
already utterly exhausted all three of them. 
They began to suffer the beginnings of hunger, 
the night was cold, and none of them dared to 
sleep. And in the evening many people came 
hurrying along the road near by their stoppingplace, fleeing from unknown dangers before 
them and going in the direction from which my 
brother had come. 



XVII. 

THE ' THUNDER CHILD.' 

HAD the Martians aimed only at destruction, 
they might on Monday have annihilated the 
entire population of London, as it spread itself 
slowly through the home counties. Not onl\ 
along the road through Barnet, but also througl 
Edgware and Waltham Abbey, and along the 
roads eastward to Southend and Shoeburyness, 
and south of the Thames to Deal and Broadstairs, poured the same frantic rout. If one 
could have hung that June morning in 
balloon in the blazing blue above London, 
every northward and eastward road running 
out of the infinite tangle of streets would have 
seemed stippled black with the streaming 
fugitives, each dot a human agony of terror 
and physical distress. I have set forth at 
length in the last chapter my brother's account 
of the road through Chipping Barnet, in order 
that my readers may realize how that swarming 
of black dots appeared to one of those con


The ' Thunder Child ' 

cerned. Never before in the history of th 
world had such a mass of human beings moved 
and suffered together. The legendary hosts of 
Goths and Huns, the hugest armies Asia has 
ever seen, would have been but a drop in that 
current. And this was no disciplined march ; 
it was a stampede a stampede gigantic and 
terrible without order and without a goal, six 
million people, unarmed and unprovisioned, 
driving headlong. It was the beginning of 
the rout of civilization, of the massacre of mankind. 

Directly below him the balloonist would have 
seen the network of streets far and wide, 
houses, churches, squares, crescents, gardens 
already derelict spread out like a huge map, 
and in the southward blotted. Over Ealing, 
Richmond, Wimbledon, it would have seemed 
as if some monstrous pen had flung ink upon 
the chart. Steadily, incessantly, each black 
splash grew and spread, shooting out ramifications this way and that, now banking itself 
against rising ground, now pouring swiftly over 
a crest into a new-found valley, exactly as a 
gout of ink would spread itself upon blotting 
paper. 

And beyond, over the blue hills that rise 
southward of the river, the glittering Martians 



The War of the Worlds 

went to and fro, calmly and methodically 
spreading their poison-cloud over this patch of 
country, and then over that, laying it again 
with their steam-jets when it had served its 
purpose, and taking possession of the conquerec 
country. They do not seem to have aimed at 
extermination so much as at complete demoralization and the destruction of any opposition. 
They exploded any stores of powder they came 
upon, cut every telegraph, and wrecked the 
railways here and there. They were hamstringing mankind. They seemed in no hurr 
to extend the field of their operations, and di( 
not come beyond the central part of London all 
that day. It is possible that a very considerable number of people in London stuck to their 
houses through Monday morning. Certain it 
is that many died at home, suffocated by the 
Black Smoke. 

Until about mid-day, the Pool of London 
was an astonishing scene. Steamboats and 
shipping of all sorts lay there, tempted by the 
enormous sums of money offered by fugitives, 
and it is said that many who swam out to these 
vessels were thrust off with boathooks and 
drowned. About one o'clock in the afternoon 
the thinning remnant of a cloud of the black 
vapour appeared between the arches of Black


The c Thunder Child ' 175 

friars Bridge. At that the Pool became a scene 
of mad confusion, fighting and collision, and for 
some time a multitude of boats and barges 
jammed in the northern arch of the Tower 
Bridge, and the sailors and lightermen had to 
fight savagely against the people who swarmed 
upon them from the river front. People were 
actually clambering down the piers of the 
bridge from above. . . . 

When, an hour later, a Martian appeared 
beyond the Clock Tower and waded down the 
river, nothing but wreckage floated above 
Limehouse. 

Of the falling of the fifth cylinder I have 
presently to tell. The sixth star fell at 
Wimbledon. My brother, keeping watch beside the women sleeping in the chaise in a 
meadow, saw the green flash of it far beyond 
the hills. On Tuesday the little party, still set 
upon getting across the sea, made its way 
through the swarming country towards Colchester. The news that the Martians were 
now in possession of the whole of London was 
confirmed. They had been seen at Highgate, 
and even, it was said, at Neasdon. But they 
did not come into my brother's view until the 
morrow. 

That day the scattered multitudes began to 

 

realize the urgent need of provisions. As they 
grew hungry the rights of property ceased to 
be regarded. Farmers were out to defend their 
cattle-sheds, granaries, and ripening root crops 
with arms in their hands. A number of people 
now, like my brother, had their faces eastward, 
and there were some desperate souls ever 
going back towards London to get food. These 
were chiefly people from the northern suburbs, 
whose knowledge of the Black Smoke came bj 
hearsay. He heard that about half the members 
of the Government had gathered at Birmingham, and that enormous quantities of high explosives were being prepared to be used ii 
automatic mines across the Midland counties. 

He was also told that the Midland Railway 
Company had replaced the desertions of th( 
first day's panic, had resumed traffic, and were 
running northward trains from St. Albans tc 
relieve the congestion of the home counties. 
There was also a placard in Chipping Ongar 
announcing that large stores of flour were 
available in the northern towns, and that withii 
twenty-four hours bread would be distributee 
among the starving people in the neighbourhood. But this intelligence did not deter him 
from the plan of escape he had formed, and the 
three pressed eastward all day, and saw nc 



The Thunder Child ' 177 

more of the bread distribution than this promise. 
Nor, as a matter of fact, did anyone else see 
more of it. That night fell the seventh star, 
falling upon Primrose Hill. It fell while 
Miss Elphinstone was watching, for she took 
that duty alternately with my brother. She 
saw it. 

On Wednesday the three fugitives they had 
passed the night in a field of unripe wheat 
reached Chelmsford, and there a body of the 
inhabitants, calling itself the Committee of 
Public Supply, seized the pony as provisions, and would give nothing in exchange 
for it but the promise of a share in it the next 
day. Here there were rumours of Martians at 
Epping, and news of the destruction of Waltham 
Abbey Powder Mills in a vain attempt to blow 
up one of the invaders. 

People were watching for Martians here from 
the church towers. My brother, very luckily 
for him as it chanced, preferred to push on at 
once to the coast, rather than wait for food, 
although all three of them were very hungry. 
By mid-day they passed through Tillingham, 
which strangely enough seemed to be quite 
silent and deserted, save for a few furtive 
plunderers, hunting for food. Near Tillingham they suddenly came in sight of the sea, 

12 

 

and the most amazing crowd of shipping of all 
sorts that it is possible to imagine. 

For after the sailors could no longer come up 
the Thames, they came on to the Essex coast, 
to Harwich, and Walton, and Clacton, and 
afterwards to Foulness and Shoebury, to bring 
off the people. They lay in a huge sickleshaped curve that vanished into mist at last 
towards the Naze. Close inshore was a multitude of fishing - smacks, English, Scotch, 
French, Dutch and Swedish ; steam-launches 
from the Thames, yachts, electric boats ; and 
beyond were ships of larger burthen, a 
multitude of filthy colliers, trim merchantmen, 
cattle-ships, passenger-boats, petroleum-tanks, 
ocean tramps, an old white transport even, neat 
white and gray liners from Southampton and 
Hamburg ; and along the blue coast across the 
Blackwater my brother could make out dimly 
a dense swarm of boats chaffering with the 
people on the beach, a swarm which also extended up the Blackwater almost to Maldon. 

About a couple of miles out lay an ironclad 
very low in the water, almost, to my brother's 
perception, like a water-logged ship. This was 
the ram Thunder Child. It was the only 
warship in sight, but far away to the right over 
the smooth surface of the sea for that day 



The Thunder Child ' 179 

there was a dead calm lay a serpent of black 
smoke to mark the next ironclads of the 
Channel Fleet, which hovered in an extended 
line, steam up and ready for action, across the 
Thames estuary during the course of the 
Martian conquest, vigilant and yet powerless to 
prevent it. 

At the sight of the sea, Mrs. Elphinstone, in 
spite of the assurances of her sister-in-law, gave 
way to panic. She had never been out of England before, she would rather die than trust herself friendless in a foreign country, and so forth. 
She seemed, poor woman ! to imagine that the 
French and the Martians might prove very 
similar. She had been growing increasingly 
hysterical, fearful and depressed, during the 
two days' journeyings. Her great idea was to 
return to Stanmore. Things had been always 
well and safe at Stanmore. They would find 
George at Stanmore. . . . 

It was with the greatest difficulty they could 
get her down to the beach, where presently my 
brother succeeded in attracting the attention 
"t>f some men on a paddle steamer out of the 
Thames. They sent a boat and drove a 
bargain for thirty-six pounds for the three. 
The steamer was going, these men said, to 
Ostend. 

12 2 


 

It was about two o'clock when my brother, 
having paid their fares at the gangway, found 
himself safely aboard the steamboat with his 
charges. There was food aboard, albeit at 
exorbitant prices, and the three of them contrived to eat a meal on one of the seats 
forward. 

There were already a couple of score of 
passengers aboard, some of whom had expended their last money in securing a passage, 
but the captain lay off the Blackwater until 
five in the afternoon, picking up passengers 
until the seated decks were even dangerously 
crowded. He would probably have remained 
longer had it not been for the sound of guns 
that began about that hour in the south. As 
if in answer, the ironclad seaward fired a 
small gun and hoisted a string of flags. A 
jet of smoke sprang out of her funnels. 

Some of the passengers were of opinion 
that this firing came from Shoeburyness, until 
it was noticed that it was growing louder. At 
the same time, far away in the south-east, the 
masts and upper- works of three ironclads rose 
one after the other out of the sea, beneath 
clouds of black smoke. But my brother's 
attention speedily reverted to the distant 
firing in the south. He fancied he saw a 



The 'Thunder Child' 181 

column of smoke rising out of the distant gray 
haze. 

The little steamer was already flapping her 
way eastward of the big crescent of shipping, 
and the low Essex coast was growing blue and 
hazy, when a Martian appeared, small and 
faint in the remote distance, advancing along 
the muddy coast from the direction of Foulness. At that the captain on the bridge swore 
at the top of his voice with fear and anger at 
his own delay, and the paddles seemed infected 
with his terror. Every soul aboard stood at 
the bulwarks or on the seats of the steamer, 
and stared at that distant shape, higher than 
the trees or church towers inland, and advancing with a leisurely parody of a human stride. 

It was the first Martian my brother had 
seen, and he stood, more amazed than terrified, 
watching this Titan advancing deliberately towards the shipping, wading farther and farther 
into the water as the coast fell away. Then, 
far away beyond the Crouch, came another 
striding over some stunted trees, and then yet 
'another still further off, wading deeply through 
a shiny mudflat that seemed to hang halfway 
up between sea and sky. They were all stalking seaward, as if to intercept the escape of 
the multitudinous vessels that were crowded 


 

between Foulness and the Naze. In spite of 
the throbbing exertions of the engines of the 
little paddle-boat, and the pouring foam that 
her wheels flung behind her, she receded with 
terrifying slowness from this ominous advance. 

Glancing north-westward, my brother saw 
the large crescent of shipping already writhing 
with the approaching terror ; one ship passing 
behind another, another coming round from 
broadside to end on, steamships whistling and 
giving off volumes of steam, sails being let 
out, launches rushing hither and thither. He 
was so fascinated by this and by the creeping 
danger away to the left that he had no eyes 
for anything seaward. And then a swift movement of the steamboat (she had suddenly come 
round to avoid being run down) flung him 
headlong from the seat upon which he was 
standing. There was a shouting all about 
him, a trampling of feet, and a cheer that 
seemed to be answered faintly. The steamboat lurched, and rolled him over upon his 
hands. 

He sprang to his feet and saw to starboard, 
and not a hundred yards from their heeling, 
pitching boat, a vast iron bulk like the blade 
of a plough tearing through the water, tossing 
it on either side in huge waves of foam that 



The 'Thunder Child' 183 

leapt towards the steamer, flinging her paddles 
helplessly in the air, and then sucking her deck 
down almost to the water-line. 

A douche of spray blinded my brother for a 
moment. When his eyes were clear again, he 
saw the monster had passed and was rushing 
landward. Big iron upper- works rose out of 
this headlong structure, and from that twin 
funnels projected, and spat a smoking blast 
shot with fire into the air. It was the torpedoram, Thunder Child, steaming headlong, coming 
to the rescue of the threatened shipping. 

Keeping his footing on the heaving deck by 
clutching the bulwarks, my brother looked past 
this charging leviathan at the Martians again, 
and he saw the three of them now close 
together, and standing so far out to sea that 
their tripod supports were almost entirely submerged. Thus sunken, and seen in remote 
perspective, they appeared far less formidable 
than the huge iron bulk in whose wake the 
steamer was pitching so helplessly. It would 
seem they were regarding this new antagonist 
with astonishment. To their intelligence, it 
may be, the giant was even such another as 
themselves. The Thunder Child fired no gun, 
but simply drove full speed towards them. It 
was probably her not firing that enabled her to 


 

get so near the enemy as she did. They did 
not know what to make of her. One shell, 
and they would have sent her to the bottom 
forthwith with the Heat- Ray. 

She was steaming at such a pace that in a 
minute she seemed halfway between the steamboat and the Martians a diminishing black 
bulk against the receding horizontal expanse of 
the Essex coast. 

Suddenly the foremost Martian lowered his 
tube, and discharged a canister of the black 
gas at the ironclad. It hit her larboard side, 
and glanced off in an inky jet, that rolled away 
to seaward, an unfolding torrent of black smoke, 
from which the ironclad drove clear. To the 
watchers from the steamer, low in the water and 
with the sun in their eyes, it seemed as though 
she was already among the Martians. 

They saw the gaunt figures separating and 
rising out of the water as they retreated shoreward, and one of them raised the camera-like 
generator of the Heat- Ray. He held it pointing obliquely downward, and a bank of steam 
sprang from the water at its touch. It must 
have driven through the iron of the ship's side 
like a white-hot iron rod through paper. 

A flicker of flame went up through the rising 
steam, and then the Martian reeled and staggered. 



The 'Thunder Child' 185 

In another moment he was cut down, and a 
great body of water and steam shot high in 
the air. The guns of the Thunder Child 
sounded through the reek, going off one after 
the other, and one shot splashed the water 
high close by the steamer, ricocheted towards 
the other flying ships to the north, and smashed 
a smack to matchwood. 

But no one heeded that very much. At the 
sight of the Martian's collapse, the captain on 
the bridge yelled inarticulately, and all the 
crowding passengers on the steamer's stern 
shouted together. And then they yelled again. 
For, surging out beyond the white tumult drove 
something long and black, the flames streaming 
from its middle parts, its ventilators and funnels 
spouting fire. 

She was alive still ; the steering gear, it 
seems, was intact and her engines working. 
She headed straight for a second Martian, and 
was within a hundred yards of him when the 
Heat- Ray came to bear. Then with a violent 
thud, a blinding flash, her decks, her funnels, 
leapt upward. The Martian staggered with 
the violence of her explosion, and in another 
moment the flaming wreckage, still driving 
forward with the impetus of its pace, had 
struck him and crumpled him up like a thing of 


 

cardboard. My brother shouted involuntarily. 
A boiling tumult of steam hid everything again. 

' Two !' yelled the captain. 

Everyone was shouting ; the whole steamer 
from end to end rang with frantic cheering that 
was taken up first by one and then by all in the 
crowding multitude of ships and boats that 
driving out to sea. 

The steam hung upon the water for man] 
minutes, hiding the third Martian and the coast 
altogether. And all this time the boat We 
paddling steadily out to sea and away from the 
fight ; and when at last the confusion cleare( 
the drifting bank of black vapour intervene( 
and nothing of the Thunder Child could be 
made out, nor could the third Martian be seei 
But the ironclads to seaward were now quite 
close, and standing in towards shore past the 
steamboat. 

The little vessel continued to beat its waj 
seaward, and the ironclads receded slow!) 
towards the coast, which was hidden still by 
marbled bank of vapour, part steam, part black 
gas, eddying and combining in the strangest 
ways. The fleet of refugees was scattering to 
the north-east ; several smacks were sailing 
between the ironclads and the steamboat. 
After a time, and before they reached the sink


The 'Thunder Child' 187 

ing cloud-bank, the warships turned northwards, 
and then abruptly went about and passed into 
the thickening haze of evening southward. The 
coast grew faint, and at last indistinguishable 
amidst the low banks of clouds that were 
gathering about the sinking sun. 

Then suddenly out of the golden haze of the 
sunset came the vibration of guns, and a form 
of black shadows moving. Everyone struggled 
to the rail of the steamer and peered into the 
blinding furnace of the west, but nothing was 
to be distinguished clearly. A mass of smoke 
rose slantingly and barred the face of the sun. 
The steamboat throbbed on its way through an 
interminable suspense. 

The sun sank into gray clouds, the sky 
flushed and darkened, the evening star trembled 
into sight. It was deep twilight when the 
captain cried out and pointed. My brother 
strained his eyes. Something rushed up into 
the sky out of the grayness, rushed slantingly 
upward and very swiftly into the luminous 
clearness above the clouds in the western sky, 
"something flat and broad and very large, that 
swept round in a vast curve, grew smaller, sank 
slowly, and vanished again into the gray 
mystery of the night. And as it flew it rained 
down darkness upon the land. 



BOOK II. THE EARTH UNDER TH] 
MARTIANS. 

I. 

UNDER FOOT. 

IN the first book I have wandered so mucl 
from my own adventures to tell of the experiences of my brother, that all through the 
last two chapters I and the curate have beei 
lurking in the empty house at Halliford, 
whither we fled to escape the Black Smoke. 
There I will resume. We stopped there all 
Sunday night and all the next day the day 
of the panic in a little island of daylight, cut 
off by the Black Smoke from the rest of the 
world. We could do nothing but wait, in an 
aching inactivity, during those two weary days. 
My mind was occupied by anxiety for my 
wife. I figured her at Leatherhead, terrified, 
in danger, mourning me already as a dead man. 
I paced the rooms and cried aloud when I 
thought of how I was cut off from her, of all 






Under Foot 189 

that might happen to her in my absence. My 
cousin I knew was brave enough for any emergency, but he was not the sort of man to realize 
danger quickly, to rise promptly. What was 
needed now was not bravery, but circumspection. 
My only consolation was to believe that the 
Martians were moving Londonward and -away 
from her. Such vague anxieties keep the mind 
sensitive and painful. I grew very weary and 
irritable with the curate's perpetual ejaculations, 
I tired of the sight of his selfish despair. After 
some ineffectual remonstrance I kept away from 
him, staying in a room containing globes, forms, 
and copy-books, that was evidently a children's 
schoolroom. When at last he followed me 
thither, I went to a box-room at the top of the 
house and locked myself in, in order to be 
alone with my aching miseries. 

We were hopelessly hemmed in by the Black 
Smoke all that day, and the morning of the next. 
There were signs of people in the next house 
on Sunday evening a face at a window and 
moving lights, and later the slamming of a door. 
But I do not know who these people were, nor 
what became of them. We saw nothing of them 
next day. The Black Smoke drifted slowly 
riverward all through Monday morning, creeping nearer and nearer to us, driving at last 


 

along the roadway outside the house that 
hid us. 

A Martian came across the fields about midday, laying the stuff with a jet of superheated 
steam that hissed against the walls, smashed all 
the windows it touched, and scalded the curate's 
hand as he fled out of the front-room. When 
at last we crept across the sodden rooms and 
looked out again, the country northward was as 
though a black snowstorm had passed over it. 
Looking towards the river, we were astonished 
to see an unaccountable redness mingling with 
the black of the scorched meadows. 

For a time we did not see how this change 
affected our position, save that we were relieved 
of our fear of the Black Smoke. But later I 
perceived that we were no longer hemmed in, 
that now we might get away. So soon as I 
realized the way of escape was open, my dream 
of action returned. But the curate was lethargic, 
unreasonable. 

'We are safe here,' he repeated 'safe 
here.' 

I resolved to leave him would that I had ! 
Wiser now for the artilleryman's teaching, I 
sought out food and drink. I had found oil 
and rags for my burns, and I also took a hat 
and a flannel shirt that I found in one of the 



Under Foot 191 

bedrooms. When it was clear to him that I 
meant to go alone, had reconciled myself to 
going alone, he suddenly roused himself to 
come. And, all being quiet throughout the 
afternoon, we started, as I should judge, about 
five along the blackened road to Sunbury. 

In Sunbury, and at intervals along the road, 
were dead bodies lying in contorted attitudes 
horses as well as men overturned carts and 
luggage, all covered thickly with black dust. 
That pall of cindery powder made me think of 
what I had read of the destruction of Pompeii. 
We got to Hampton Court without misadventure, our minds full of strange and unfamiliar 
appearances, and at Hampton Court our eyes 
were relieved to find a patch of green that had 
escaped the suffocating drift. We went through 
Bushey Park, with its deer going to and fro 
under the chestnuts, and some men and women 
hurrying in the distance towards Hampton, and 
so came to Twickenham. These were the 
first people we saw. 

Away across the road the woods beyond 
Ham and Petersham were still afire. Twickenham was uninjured by either Heat- Ray or 
Black Smoke, and there were more people 
about here, though none could give us news. 
For the most part, they were like ourselves, 

 

taking advantage of a lull to shift their quarters. 
I have an impression that many of the houses 
here were still occupied by scared inhabitants, 
too frightened even for flight. Here, too, the 
evidence of a hasty rout was abundant along 
the road. I remember most vividly three 
smashed bicycles in a heap, pounded into the 
road by the wheels of subsequent carts. We 
crossed Richmond Bridge about half-past eight. 
We hurried across the exposed bridge, of course, 
but I noticed floating down the stream a number 
of red masses, some many feet across. I did 
not know what these were there was no time 
for scrutiny and I put a more horrible interpretation on them than they deserved. Here, 
again, on the Surrey side, was black dust that 
had once been smoke, and dead bodies a heap 
near the approach to the station and never a 
sight of the Martians until we were some way 
towards Barnes. 

We saw in the blackened distance a group of 
three people running down a side-street towards 
the river, but otherwise it seemed deserted. 
Up the hill Richmond town was burning 
briskly ; outside the town of Richmond there 
was no trace of the Black Smoke. 

Then suddenly, as we approached Kew, came 
a number of people running, and the upper- works 



Under Foot 193 

of a Martian Fighting Machine loomed in sight 
over the housetops, not a hundred yards away 
from us. We stood aghast at our danger, and 
had he looked down we must immediately have 
perished. We were so terrified that we dared 
not go on, but turned aside and hid in a shed inf 
a garden. There the curate crouched, weeping 
silently, and refusing to stir again. 

But my fixed idea of reaching Leatherhead 
would not let me rest, and in the twilight I 
ventured out again. I went through a shrubbery, and along a passage beside a big house 
standing in its own grounds, and so emerged 
upon the road towards Kew. The curate I 
left in the shed, but he came hurrying af;er 
me. 

That second start was the most foolhardy 
thing I ever did. For it was manifest the 
Martians were about us. Scarcely had he overtaken me than we saw either the Fighting 
Machine we had seen before or another, far 
away across the meadows in the direction of 
Kew Lodge. Four or five little black figures 
Jhurried before it across the green -gray of the 
field, and in a moment it was evident this 
Martian pursued them. In three strides he was 
among them, and they ran radiating from his 
feet in all directions. He used no Heat- Ray to 

13 


 

destroy them, but picked them up one by one. 
Apparently he tossed them into the great 
metallic carrier which projected behind him, 
much as a workman's basket hangs over his 
shoulder. 

It was the first time I realized the Martians 
might have any other purpose than destruction with defeated humanity. We stood for a 
moment petrified, then turned and fled through 
a gate behind us into a walled garden, fell into 
rather than found a fortunate ditch, and lay 
there, scarce daring to whisper to one another 
until the stars were out. 

I suppose it was nearly eleven at night before 
we gathered courage to start t again, no longer 
venturing into the road, but sneaking along 
hedgerows and through plantations, and watching keenly through the darkness, he on the 
right and I on the left, for the Martians, who 
seemed to be all about us. In one place we 
blundered upon a scorched and blackened area, 
now cooling and ashen, and a number of scattered 
dead bodies of men, burnt horribly about the 
heads and bodies, but with their legs and boots 
mostly intact ; and of dead horses, fifty feet, 
perhaps, behind a line of four ripped guns and 
smashed gun-carriages. 

Sheen, it seemed, had escaped destruction, 



Under Foot 195 

but the place was silent and deserted. Here 
we happened on no dead, though the night was 
too dark for us to see into the side-roads of the 
place. In Sheen my companion suddenly complained of faintness and thirst, and we decided 
to try one of the houses. 

The first house we entered, after a little difficulty with the window, was a small semi-detached 
villa, and I found nothing eatable left in the 
place but some mouldy cheese. There was, 
however, water to drink, and I took a hatchet, 
which promised to be useful in our next housebreaking. 

We crossed the road to a place where the 
road turns towards Mortlake. Here there stood 
a white house within a walled garden, and in 
the pantry of this we found a store of food two 
loaves of bread in a pan, an uncooked steak, 
and the half of a ham. I give this catalogue so 
precisely because, as it happened, we were 
destined to subsist upon this store for the next 
fortnight. Bottled beer stood under a shelf, 
and there were two bags of haricot beans and 
some limp lettuces. This pantry opened into a 
kind of wash-up kitchen, and in this was firewood, and a cupboard in which we found nearly 
a dozen of burgundy, tinned soups and salmon, 
and two tins of biscuits. 

132 


 

We sat in the adjacent kitchen in the dark 
for we dared not strike a light and ate bread 
and ham and drank beer out of one bottle. The 
curate, who was still timorous and restless, was 
now oddly enough for pushing on, and I was 
urging him to keep up his strength by eating, 
when the thing that was to imprison us 
happened. 

' It can't be midnight yet,' I said, and then 
came a blinding glare of vivid green light. 
Everything in the kitchen leapt out, clearly 
visible in green and black, and then vanished 
again. And then followed such a concussion as 
I have never heard before or since. So close 
on the heels of this as to seem instantaneous, 
came a thud behind me, a clash of glass, a crash 
and rattle of falling masonry all about us, and 
incontinently the plaster of the ceiling came 
down upon us, smashing into a multitude of 
fragments upon our heads. I was knocked 
headlong across the floor against the oven 
handle and stunned. I was insensible for a 
long time, the curate told me, and when I came 
to we were in darkness again, and he, with 
a face wet as I found afterwards with blood 
from a cut forehead, was dabbing water over 
me. 

For some time I could not recollect what had 



Under Foot 197 

happened. Then things came to me slowly. A 
bruise on my temple asserted itself. 

' Are you better ?' asked the curate, in a 
whisper. 

At last I answered him. I sat up. 

' Don't move,' he said. 'The floor is covered 
with smashed crockery from the dresser. You 
can't possibly move without making a noise, and 
I fancy they are outside.' 

We both sat quite silent, so that we could 
scarcely hear one another breathing. Everything seemed deadly still, though once something near us, some plaster or broken brickwork, 
slid down with a rumbling sound. Outside 
and very near was an intermittent, metallic 
rattle. 

' That !' said the curate, when presently it 
happened again. 

' Yes,' I said. ' But what is it ?' 

' A Martian !' said the curate. 

I listened again. 

' It was not like the Heat- Ray,' I said, and 
for a time I was inclined to think one of the great Fighting Machines had stumbled against 
the house, as I had seen one stumble against 
the tower of Shepperton Church. 

Our situation was so strange and incomprehensible that for three or four hours, until the 


 

dawn came, we scarcely moved. And then the 
light filtered in, not through the window, which 
remained black, but through a triangular aperture between a beam and a heap of broken 
bricks in the wall behind us. The interior of 
the kitchen we now saw grayly for the first 
time. 

The window had been burst in by a mass of 
garden mould, which flowed over the table upon 
which we had been sitting and lay about our 
feet. Outside the soil was banked high against 
the house. At the top of the window-frame we 
could see an uprooted drain-pipe. The floor 
was littered with smashed hardware ; the end 
of the kitchen towards the house was broken 
into, and since the daylight shone in there it 
was evident the greater part of the house had 
collapsed. Contrasting vividly with this ruin 
was the neat dresser, stained in the fashion, 
pale green, and with a number of copper and 
tin vessels below it, the wall-paper imitating 
blue and white tiles, and a couple of coloured 
supplements fluttering from the walls above the 
kitchen range. 

As the dawn grew clearer, we saw through 
the gap in the wall the body of a Martian 
standing sentinel, I suppose, over the still glowing cylinder. At the sight of that we crawled 



Under Foot 199 

as circumspectly as possible out of the twilight 
of the kitchen into the darkness of the scullery. 

Abruptly the right interpretation of the things 
dawned upon my mind. 

'The fifth cylinder,' I whispered, 'the fifth 
shot from Mars, has struck this house and 
buried us under the ruins !' 

For a space the curate was silent, and then 
he whispered : 

' God have mercy upon us !' 

I heard him presently whimpering to himself. 

Save for that sound we lay quite still in the 
scullery. I for my part scarce dared breathe, 
and sat with my eyes fixed on the faint light of 
the kitchen door. I could just see the curate's 
face, a dim oval shape, and his collar and cuffs. 
Outside there began a metallic hammering, and 
then a violent hooting, and then, after a quiet 
interval, a hissing, like the hissing of an engine. 
These noises, for the most part problematical, 
continued intermittently, and seemed, if anything, to increase in number as the time wore 
''on. Presently a measured thudding, and a 
vibration that made everything about us quiver 
and the vessels in the pantry ring and shift, 
began and continued. Once the light was 
eclipsed, and the ghostly kitchen doorway 



20O 



The War of the Worlds 



became absolutely dark. For many hours we 
must have crouched there, silent and shivering, 
until our tired attention failed. . . . 

At last I found myself awake and very 
hungry. I am inclined to believe we must 
have been the greater portion of a day before 
that awakening. My hunger was at a stride so 
insistent that it moved me to action. I told 
him I was going to seek food, and felt my way 
towards the pantry. He made me no answer, 
but so soon as I began eating, the faint noise I 
made stirred him to action, and I heard him 
crawling after me. 



II. 

WHAT WE SAW FROM THE RUINED HOUSE. 

AFTER eating we crept back to the scullery, 
and there I must have dozed again, for when 
presently I stirred I was alone. The thudding 
vibration continued with wearisome persistence. 
I whispered for the curate several times, and at 
last felt my way to the door of the kitchen. It 
was still daylight, and I perceived him across 
the room, lying against the triangular hole that 
looked out upon the Martians. His shoulders 
were hunched, so that his head was hidden 
from me. 

I could hear a number of noises, almost like 
those of an engine-shed, and the place rocked 
with that beating thud. Through the aperture 
in the wall I could see the top of a tree touched 
""With gold, and the warm blue of a tranquil 
evening sky. For a minute or so I remained 
watching the curate, and then I advanced, 
crouching and stepping with extreme care amidst 
the broken crockery that littered the floor. 



202 The War of the World 

I touched the curate's leg, and he started so 
violently that a mass of plaster went sliding 
down outside and fell with a loud impact I 
gripped his arm, fearing he might cry out, and 
for a long time we crouched motionless. Then 
I turned to see how much of our rampart remained. The detachment of the plaster had 
left a vertical slit open in the debris, and by 
raising myself cautiously across a beam I was 
able to see out of this gap into what had been 
overnight a quiet suburban roadway. Vast 
indeed was the change that we beheld. 

The fifth cylinder must have fallen right into 
the midst of the house we had first visited. 
The building had vanished, completely smashed, 
pulverized and dispersed by the blow. The 
cylinder lay now far beneath the original foundations, deep in a hole, already vastly larger 
than the pit I had looked into at Woking. The 
earth all round it had splashed under that tremendous impact ' splashed ' is the only word 
and lay in heaped piles that hid the masses of 
the adjacent houses. It had behaved exactly 
like mud under the violent blow of a hammer. 
Our house had collapsed backwards ; the front 
portion, even on the ground-floor, had been 
destroyed completely ; by a chance, the kitchen 
and scullery had escaped, and stood buried now 



What we saw from the Ruined House 203 

under soil and ruins, closed in by tons of earth 
on every side, save towards the cylinder. Over 
that aspect we hung now on the very verge of 
the great circular pit the Martians were engaged 
in making. The heavy beating sound was 
evidently just behind us, and ever and again a 
bright green vapour drove up like a veil across 
our peephole. 

The cylinder was already opened in the 
centre of the pit, and on the further edge of 
the pit, amidst the smashed and gravel-heaped 
shrubbery, one of the great Fighting Machines 
stood, deserted by its occupant, stiff and tall 
against the evening sky. At first I scarcely 
noticed the pit or the cylinder, although it has 
been convenient to describe them first, on 
account of the extraordinary glittering mechanism I saw, busy in the excavation, and on 
account of the strange creatures that were 
crawling slowly and painfully across the heaped 
mould near it. 

The mechanism it certainly was held my 
attention first. It was one of those compli1:ated fabrics that have since been called Handling Machines, and the study of which has 
already given such an enormous impetus to 
terrestrial invention. As it dawned upon me 
first it presented a sort of metallic spider with 

 

five jointed, agile legs, and with an extraordinary number of jointed levers, bars, and 
reaching and clutching tentacles about its body. 
Most of its arms were retracted, but with three 
long tentacles it was fishing out a number of 
rods, plates and bars which lined the covering 
of, and apparently strengthened the walls of, 
the cylinder. These, as it extracted them, 
were lifted out and deposited upon a level 
surface of earth behind it. 

Its motion was so swift, complex and perfect 
that at first I did not see it as a machine, in 
spite of its metallic glitter. The Fighting 
Machines were co-ordinated and animated to 
an extraordinary pitch, but nothing to compare 
with this. People who have never seen these 
structures, and have only the ill-imagined efforts 
of artists or the imperfect descriptions of such 
eye-witnesses as myself to go upon, scarcely 
realize that living quality. 

I recall particularly the illustration of one of 
the first pamphlets to give a consecutive 
account of the war. The artist had evidently 
made a hasty study of one of the Fighting 
Machines, and there his knowledge ended. He 
presented them as tilted, stiff tripods, without 
either flexibility or subtlety, and with an altogether misleading monotony of effect. The 



What we saw from the Ruined House 205 

pamphlet containing these renderings had a 
considerable vogue, and I mention them here 
simply to warn the reader against the impression they may have created. They were no 
more like the Martians I saw in action than a 
Dutch doll is like a human being. To my 
mind, the pamphlet would have been much 
better without them. 

At first, I say, the Handling Machine did 
not impress me as a machine, but as a crablike creature with a glittering integument, the 
controlling Martian, whose delicate tentacles 
actuated its movements, seeming to be simply 
the equivalent of the crab's cerebral portion. 
But then I perceived the resemblance of its 
gray-brown, shiny, leathery integument to that 
of the other sprawling bodies beyond, and the 
true nature of this dexterous workman dawned 
upon me. With that realization my interest 
shifted to those other creatures, the real Martians. Already I had had a transient impression of these, and the first nausea no longer 
obscured my observation. Moreover, I was 
-concealed and motionless, and under no urgency 
of action. 

They were, I now saw, the most unearthly 
creatures it is possible to conceive. They were 
huge round bodies or, rather, heads about 

 

four feet in diameter, each body having in front 
of it a face. This face had no nostrils indeed, 
the Martians do not seem to have had any sense 
of smell but it had a pair of very large, darkcoloured eyes, and just beneath this a kind of 
fleshy beak. In the back of this head or body 
I scarcely know how to speak of it was the 
single tight tympanic surface, since known to 
be anatomically an ear, though it must have 
been almost useless in our denser air. In a 
group round the mouth were sixteen slender, 
almost whip-like tentacles, arranged in two 
bunches of eight each. These bunches have 
since been named rather aptly, by that distinguished anatomist Professor Howes, the 
hands. Even as I saw these Martians for the 
first time they seemed to be endeavouring to 
raise themselves on these hands, but of course, 
with the increased weight of terrestrial conditions, this was impossible. There is reason 
to suppose that on Mars they may have progressed upon them with some facility. 

The internal anatomy, I may remark here, 
dissection has since shown, was almost equally 
simple. The greater part of the structure was 
the brain, sending enormous nerves to the eyes, 
ear and tactile tentacles. Besides this were the 
complex lungs, into which the mouth opened, 



What we saw from the Ruined House 207 

and the heart and its vessels. The pulmonary 
distress caused by the denser atmosphere and 
greater gravitational attraction was only too 
evident in the convulsive movements of the 
outer skin. 

And this was the sum of the Martian organs. 
Strange as it may seem to a human being, all 
the complex apparatus of digestion, which makes 
up the bulk of our bodies, did not exist in the 
Martians. They were heads, merely heads. 
Entrails they had none. They did not eat, much 
less digest. Instead, they took the fresh living 
blood of other creatures, and injected it into 
their own veins. I have myself seen this being 
done, as I shall mention in its place. But, 
squeamish as I may seem, I cannot bring myself to describe what I could not endure even 
to continue watching. Let it suffice, blood 
obtained from a still living animal, in most 
cases from a human being, was run directly 
by means of a little pipette into the recipient 
canal. . . . 

The bare idea of this is no doubt horribly 
repulsive to us, but at the same time I think 
that we should remember how repulsive our 
carnivorous habits would seem to an intelligent 
rabbit. 

The physiological advantages of the practice 



208 



The War of the Worlds 



of injection are undeniable, if one thinks of th( 
tremendous waste of human time and energy 
occasioned by eating and the digestive process. 
Our bodies are half made up of glands am 
tubes and organs, occupied in turning heterogeneous food into blood. The digestive processes and their reaction upon the nervous 
system sap our strength, colour our minds. 
Men go happy or miserable as they have 
healthy or unhealthy livers, or sound gastric 
glands. But the Martians were lifted above 
all these organic fluctuations of mood and 
emotion. 

Their undeniable preference for men as theii 
source of nourishment is partly explained by the 
nature of the remains of the victims they had 
brought with them as provisions from Mars. 
These creatures, to judge from the shrivellec 
remains that have fallen into human hands, were 
bipeds, with flimsy siliceous skeletons (almost 
like those of the siliceous sponges) and feeble 
musculature, standing about six feet high, anc 
having round erect heads, and large eyes 
in flinty sockets. Two or three of these 
seem to have been brought in each cylinder, 
and all were killed before earth was reached. 
It was just as well for them, for the mere 
attempt to stand upright upon our planet 



What we saw from the Ruined House 209 

would have broken every bone in their 
bodies. 

And while I am engaged in this description, 
I may add in this place certain further details, 
which, although they were not all evident to us 
at the time, will enable the reader who is unacquainted with them to form a clearer picture of 
these offensive creatures. 

In three other points their physiology differed 
strangely from ours. Their organisms did not 
sleep, any more than the heart of man sleeps. 
Since they had no extensive muscular mechanism 
to recuperate, that periodical extinction was 
unknown to them. They had little or no sense 
of fatigue, it would seem. On earth they can 
never have moved without effort, yet even to 
the last they kept in action. In twenty- four 
hours they did twenty-four hours of work, as 
even on earth is perhaps the case with the 
ants. 

In the next place, wonderful as it seems in a 
sexual world, the Martians were absolutely 
without sex, and therefore without any of the 
tumultuous emotions that arise from that difference among men. A young Martian, there 
can now be no dispute, was really born upon 
earth during the war, and it was found attached 
to its parent, partially budded off, just as young 

 

lily bulbs bud off, or the young animals in the 
fresh-water polyp. 

In man, in all the higher terrestrial animals, 
such a method of increase has disappeared; but 
even on this earth it was certainly the primitive 
method. Among the lower animals, up even to 
those first cousins of the vertebrated animals, 
the Tunicates, the two processes occur side by 
side, but finally the sexual method superseded 
its competitor altogether. On Mars, however, 
just the reverse has apparently been the case. 

It is worthy of remark that a certain speculative writer of quasi-scientific repute, writing long 
before the Martian invasion, did forecast for 
man a final structure not unlike the actua 
Martian condition. His prophecy, I remember, 
appeared in November or December, 1893, in 
a long defunct publication, the Pall Mall Budget, 
and I recall a caricature of it in a pre- Martian 
periodical called Punch. He pointed outwriting in a foolish facetious tone that the perfection of mechanical appliances must ultimately 
supersede limbs, the perfection of chemical 
devices, digestion that such organs as hair, 
external nose, teeth, ears, chin, were no longer 
essential parts of the human being, and that 
the tendency of natural selection would lie in the 
direction of their steady diminution through the 



What we saw from the Ruined House 2 1 1 

coming ages. The brain alone remained a 
cardinal necessity. Only one other part of the 
body had a strong case for survival, and that 
was the hand, ' teacher and agent of the brain.' 
While the rest of the body dwindled, the hands 
would grow larger. 

There is many a true word written in jest, 
and here in the Martians we have beyond 
dispute the actual accomplishment of such a 
suppression of the animal side of the organism 
by the intelligence. To me it is quite credible 
that the Martians may be descended from 
beings not unlike ourselves, by a gradual 
development of brain and hands (the latter 
giving rise to the two bunches of delicate 
tentacles at last) at the expense of the rest of 
the body. Without the body the brain would 
of course become a more selfish intelligence, 
without any of the emotional substratum of the 
human being. 

The last salient point in which the systems 
of these creatures differed from ours was in what 
one might have thought a very trivial particular. 
Micro-organisms, which cause so much disease 
and pain on earth, have either never appeared 
upon Mars, or Martian sanitary science eliminated them ages ago. A hundred diseases, all 
the fevers and contagions of human life, con
142 



 

sumption, cancers, tumours, and such morbidities, never enter the scheme of their life. 
And speaking of the differences between the 
life on Mars and terrestrial life, I may allude 
here to the curious suggestions of the Red 
Weed. 

Apparently the vegetable kingdom in Mars, 
instead of having green for a dominant colour, 
is of a vivid blood-red tint. At any rate, the 
seeds which the Martians (intentionally or accidentally) brought with them gave rise in all 
cases to red-coloured growths. Only that known 
popularly as the Red Weed, however, gained 
any footing in competition with terrestrial forms. 
The Red Creeper was quite a transitory growth, 
and few people have seen it growing. For a 
time, however, the Red Weed grew with astonishing vigour and luxuriance. It spread up the 
sides of the pit by the third or fourth day of our 
imprisonment, and its cactus - like branches 
formed a carmine fringe to the edges of our 
triangular window. And afterwards I found it 
broadcast throughout the country, and especially 
wherever there was a stream of water. 

The Martians had what appears to have been 
an auditory organ, a: single round drum at the 
back of the head-body, and eyes with a visual 
range not very different from ours, except that, 



What we saw from the Ruined House 2 1 3 

according to Philips, blue and violet were as 
black to them. It is commonly supposed that 
they communicated by sounds and tentacular 
gesticulations ; this is asserted, for instance, in 
the able but hastily compiled pamphlet (written 
evidently by someone not an eye - witness of 
Martian actions) to which I have already 
alluded, and which, so far, has been the chief 
source of information concerning them. Now, 
no surviving human being saw so much of the 
Martians in action as I did. I take no credit 
to myself for an accident, but the fact is so. 
And I assert that I watched them closely time 
after time, and that I have seen four, five, and 
(once) six of them sluggishly performing the 
most elaborately complicated operations together, without either sound or gesture. Their 
peculiar hooting invariably preceded feeding ; 
it had no modulation, and was, I believe, in no 
sense a signal, but merely the expiration of air 
preparatory to the suctional operation. I have 
a certain claim to at least an elementary knowledge of psychology, and in this matter I am 
-convinced as firmly as I am convinced of anything that the Martians interchanged thoughts 
without any physical intermediation. And I 
have been convinced of this in spite of strong 
preconceptions. Before the Martian invasion, 



 

as an occasional reader here or there may 
remember, I had written, with some little 
vehemence, against the telepathic theory. 

The Martians wore no clothing. Their conceptions of ornament and decorum were necessarily different from ours ; and not only were 
they evidently much less sensible of changes 
of temperature than we are, but changes of 
pressure do not seem to have affected their 
health at all seriously. But if they wore no 
clothing, yet it was in the other artificial additions to their bodily resources, certainly, that 
their great superiority over man lay. We men, 
with our bicycles and road-skates, our Lilienthal 
soaring-machines, our guns and sticks, and so 
forth, are just in the beginning of the evolution 
that the Martians have worked out. They 
have become practically mere brains, wearing 
different bodies according to their needs, just 
as men wear suits of clothes, and take a bicycle 
in a hurry or an umbrella in the wet. And of 
their appliances, perhaps nothing is more 
wonderful to a man than the curious fact that 
what is the dominant feature of almost all 
human devices in mechanism is absent the 
wheel is absent ; amongst all the things they 
brought to earth there is no trace or suggestion 
of their use of wheels. One would have at 



What we saw from the Ruined House 2 1 5 

least expected it in locomotion. And in this 
connection it is curious to remark that even on 
this earth Nature has never hit upon the wheel, 
or has preferred other expedients to its development. And not only did the Martians either 
not know of (which is incredible) or abstain 
from the wheel, but in their apparatus singularly 
little use is made of the fixed pivot, or relatively 
fixed pivot, with circular motions thereabout 
confined to one plane. Almost all the joints of 
the machinery present a complicated system of 
sliding parts moving over small but beautifully 
curved friction bearings. And while upon this 
matter of detail, it is remarkable that the long 
leverages of their machines are in most cases 
actuated by a sort of sham musculature of discs 
in an elastic sheath ; these discs become polarized and drawn closely and powerfully together 
when traversed by a current of electricity. In 
this way the curious parallelism to animal 
motions, which was so striking and disturbing 
to the human beholder, was attained. Such 
quasi-muscles abounded in the crab-like Handling Machine which I watched unpacking the 
cylinder, on my first peeping out of the slit. 
It seemed infinitely more alive than the actual 
Martians lying beyond it in the sunset light, 
panting, stirring ineffectual tentacles, and 



 

moving feebly, after their vast journey across 
space. 

While I was still watching their feeble 
motions in the sunlight, and noting each 
strange detail of their form, the curate reminded me of his presence by pulling violently 
at my arm. I turned to a scowling face, and 
silent, eloquent lips. He wanted the slit, which 
permitted only one of us to peep through at a 
time ; and so I had to forego watching them 
for a time while he enjoyed that privilege. 

When I looked again, the busy Handling 
Machine had already put together several of 
the pieces of apparatus it had taken out of 
the cylinder into a shape having an unmistakable likeness to its own ; and down on the 
left a busy little digging mechanism had come 
into view, emitting jets of green vapour and 
working its way round the pit, excavating and 
embanking in a methodical and discriminating 
manner. This it was had caused the regular 
beating noise, and the rhythmic shocks that 
had kept our ruinous refuge quivering. It 
piped and whistled as it worked. So far as I 
could see, the thing was without a directing 
Martian at all. 



III. 

THE DAYS OF IMPRISONMENT. 

THE arrival of a second Fighting Machine 
drove us from our peephole into the scullery, 
for we feared that from his elevation the 
Martian might see down upon us behind our 
barrier. At a later date we began to feel less 
in danger of their eyes, for to an eye in the 
dazzle of the sunlight outside our refuge must 
have seemed a blind of blackness, but at first 
the slightest suggestion of approach drove us 
into the scullery in heart -throbbing retreat. 
Yet, terrible as was the danger we incurred, 
the attraction of peeping was for both of us 
irresistible. And I recall now with a sort of 
wonder that, spite of the infinite danger in 
which we were between starvation and a still 
<more terrible death, we could yet struggle 
bitterly for that horrible privilege of sight. 
We would race across the kitchen in a grotesque 
pace between eagerness and the dread of 
making a noise, and strike one another, and 



 

thrust and kick, within a few inches of exposure. 

The fact is that we had absolutely incompatible dispositions and habits of thought and 
action, and our danger and isolation only accentuated the incompatibility. At Halliford I 
had already come to hate his trick of helpless 
exclamation, his stupid rigidity of mind. His 
endless muttering monologue vitiated every 
effort I made to think out a line of action, and 
drove me at times, thus pent up and intensified, 
almost to the verge of craziness. He was as 
lacking in restraint as a silly woman. He 
would weep for hours together, and I verily believe that to the very end this spoilt child of 
life thought his weak tears in some way efficacious. And I would sit in the darkness 
unable to keep my mind off him by reason of 
his importunities. He ate more than I did, and 
it was in vain I pointed out that our only 
chance of life was to stop in the house until the 
Martians had done with their pit, that in that 
long patience a time might presently come 
when we should need food. He ate and drank 
impulsively in heavy meals at long intervals. 
He slept little. 

As the days wore on, his utter carelessness 
of any consideration so intensified our distress 






The Days of Imprisonment 219 

and danger that I had, much as I loathed doing 
it, to resort to threats, and at last to blows. 
That brought him to reason for a time. But 
he was one of those weak creatures full of a 
shifty cunning who face neither God nor man, 
who face not even themselves, void of pride, 
timorous, anaemic, hateful souls. 

It is disagreeable for me to recall and write 
these things, but I set them down that my 
story may lack nothing. Those who have 
escaped the dark and terrible aspects of life 
will find my brutality, my flash of rage in our 
final tragedy, easy enough to blame ; for they 
know what is wrong as well as any, but not 
what is possible to tortured men. But those 
who have been under the shadow, who have 
gone down at last to elemental things, will have 
a wider charity. 

And while within we fought out our dark 
dim contest of whispers, snatched food and 
drink and gripping hands and blows, without 
in the pitiless sunlight of that terrible June 
was the strange wonder, the unfamiliar routine 
trf the Martians in the pit. Let me return to 
those first new experiences of mine. After a 
long time I ventured back to the peephole, to 
find that the new-comers had been reinforced 
by the occupants of no less than three of the 

 

Fighting Machines. These last had brought 
with them certain fresh appliances that stood in 
an orderly manner about the cylinder. The 
second Handling Machine was now completed, 
and was busied in serving one of the novel 
contrivances the big machine had brought. 
This was a body resembling a milk-can in its 
general form above which oscillated a pearshaped receptacle, and from which a stream of 
white powder flowed into a circular basin 
below. 

The oscillatory motion was imparted to this 
by one tentacle of the Handling Machine. 
With two spatulate hands the Handling 
Machine was digging out and flinging masses 
of clay into the pear-shaped receptacle above, 
while with another arm it periodically opened a 
door and removed rusty and blackened clinkers 
from the middle part of the machine. Another 
steely tentacle directed the powder from the 
basin along a ribbed channel towards some 
receiver that was hidden from me by the mound 
of bluish dust. From this unseen receiver a 
little thread of green smoke rose vertically into 
the quiet air. As I looked, the Handling 
Machine, with a faint and musical clinking, 
extended, telescopic fashion, a tentacle that had 
been a moment before a mere blunt projection, 



The Days of Imprisonment 221 

until its end was hidden behind the mound of 
clay. In another second it had lifted a bar of 
white aluminium into sight, untarnished as yet 
and shining dazzlingly, and deposited it in a 
growing stack of bars that stood at the side of 
the pit. Between sunset and starlight this 
dexterous machine must have made more than 
a hundred such bars out of the crude clay, and 
the mound of bluish dust rose steadily until it 
topped the side of the pit. 

The contrast between the swift and complex 
movements of these contrivances and the inert, 
panting clumsiness of their masters was acute, 
and for days I had to tell myself repeatedly 
that these latter were indeed the living of the 
two things. 

The curate had possession of the slit when 
the first men were brought to the pit. I was 
sitting below, crouched together, listening with 
all my ears. He made a sudden movement 
backward, and I, fearful that we were observed, 
crouched in a spasm of terror. He came 
sliding down the rubbish, and crouched beside 
tne in the darkness, inarticulate, gesticulating, 
and for a moment I shared his terror. His 
gesture suggested a resignation of the slit, and 
after a little while my curiosity gave me courage, 
and I rose up, stepped across him, and clam
 

bered up to it. At first I could see no reasor 
for his terror. The twilight had now come, 
the stars were little and faint, but the pit was 
illuminated by the flickering green fire that 
came from the aluminium making. The whole 
picture was a flickering scheme of green gleams 
and shifting rusty black shadows, strangely 
trying to the eyes. Over and through it all 
went the bats, heeding it not at all. The 
sprawling Martians were no longer to be seen, 
the mound of blue-green powder had risen to 
cover them from sight, and a Fighting Machine, 
with its legs contracted, crumpled and abbreviated, stood across the corner of the pit. And 
then, amidst the clangour of the machinery, 
came a drifting suspicion of human voices, that 
I entertained at first only to dismiss. 

I crouched, watching this Fighting Machine 
closely, satisfying myself now for the first 
time that the hood did indeed contain 
Martian. As the green flames lifted- I could 
see the oily gleam of his integument and the 
brightness of his eyes. And suddenly I heard 
a yell, and saw a long tentacle reaching over 
the shoulder of the machine, to the little cage 
that hunched upon its back. Then something 
something struggling violently was lifted 
high against the sky, a black vague enigma 



The Days of Imprisonment 223 

against the starlight, and as this black object 
came down again, I saw by the green brightness that it was a man. For an instant he was 
clearly visible. He was a stout, ruddy, middleaged man; well dressed ; three days before he 
must have been walking the world, a man of 
considerable consequence. I could see his 
staring eyes and gleams of light on his studs 
and watch-chain. He vanished behind the 
mound, and for a moment there was silence. 
And then began a shrieking and a sustained 
and cheerful hooting from the Martians. . . . 

I slid down the rubbish, struggled to my 
feet, clapped my hands over my ears, and 
bolted into the scullery. The curate, who 
had been crouching silently with his arms over 
his head, looked up as I passed, cried out quite 
loudly at my desertion of him, and came running 
after me. ... 

That night, as we lurked in the scullery, 
balanced between our horror and the horrible 
fascination this peeping had, although I felt an 
urgent need of action, I tried in vain to conceive any plan of escape ; but afterwards, during 
the second day, I was able to consider our position with great clearness. The curate, I found, 
was quite incapable of discussion ; strange 
terrors had already made him a creature of 



224 



The War of the Worlds 



violent impulses, had robbed him of reason or 
forethought. Practically he had already sunk. 
to the level of an animal. But, as the saying 
goes, I gripped myself with both hands. It 
grew upon my mind, once I could face the 
facts, that, terrible as our position was, there 
was as yet no justification for absolute despair. 
Our chief chance lay in the possibility of the 
Martians making the pit nothing more than a 
temporary encampment. Or even if they kept 
it permanently, they might not consider it 
necessary to guard it, and a chance of escape 
might be afforded us. I also weighed very 
carefully the possibility of our digging a way 
out in a direction away from the pit, but the 
chances of our emerging within sight of some 
sentinel Fighting Machine seemed at first too 
enormous. And I should have had to have 
done all the digging myself, fhe curate would 
certainly have failed me. 

It was on the third day, if my memory 
serves me right, that I saw the lad killed. It 
was the only occasion on which I actually 
saw the Martians feed. After that experience, 
I avoided the hole in the wall for the better 
part of a day. I went into the scullery, 
removed the door, and spent some hours 
digging with my hatchet as silently as possible ; 



The Days of Imprisonment 225 

but when I had made a hole about a couple of 
feet deep the loose earth collapsed noisily, and 
I did not dare continue. I lost heart, and 
lay down on the scullery floor for a long time, 
having no spirit even to move. And after that 
I abandoned altogether the idea of escaping by 
excavation. 

It says much for the impression the Martians 
had made upon me, that at first I entertained 
little or no hope of our escape being brought 
about by their overthrow through any human 
effort. But on the fourth or fifth night I heard 
a sound like heavy guns. 

It was very late in the night, and the moon 
was shining brightly. The Martians had taken 
away the Excavating Machine, and, save for 
a Fighting Machine that stood on the remoter 
bank of the pit, and a Handling Machine 
that was busied out of my sight in a corner 
of the pit immediately beneath my peep-hole, 
the place was deserted by them. Except for 
the pale glow from the Handling Machine, 
and the bars and patches of white moonlight, the pit was in darkness, and except for 
the clinking of the Handling Machine, quite 
still. That night was a beautiful serenity ; 
save for one planet, the moon seemed to have 
the sky to herself. I heard a dog howling, and 

15 



226 



The War of the Worlds 



that familiar sound it was made me listen. 
Then I heard quite distinctly a booming 
exactly like the sound of great guns. Six 
distinct reports I counted, and after a lorn 
interval six again. And that was all. 



IV. 

THE DEATH OF THE CURATE. 

IT was on the sixth day of our imprisonment that 
I peeped for the last time, and presently found 
myself alone. Instead of keeping close to me 
and trying to oust me from the slit, the curate 
had gone back into the scullery. I was struck 
by a sudden thought. I went back quickly and 
quietly into the scullery. In the darkness I 
heard the curate drinking. I snatched in the 
darkness, and my fingers caught a bottle of 
burgundy. 

For a few minutes there was a tussle. The 
bottle struck the floor and broke, and I desisted 
and rose. We stood panting, threatening one 
another. In the end I planted myself between 
him and the food, and told him of my determination to begin a discipline. I divided the 
food in the pantry into rations to last us ten 
days. I would not let him eat any more that 
day. In the afternoon he made a feeble effort 
to get at the food. I had been dozing, but in 

152 

 

an instant I was awake. All day and all night 
we sat face to face, I weary but resolute, and 
he weeping and complaining of his immediate 
hunger. It was, I know, a night and a day, but 
to me it seemed it seems now an interminable length of time. 

And so our widened incompatibility ended 
at last in open conflict. For two vast days we 
struggled in undertones and wrestling contests. 
There were times when I beat and kicked him 
madly, times when I cajoled and persuaded 
him, and once I tried to bribe him with the last 
bottle of burgundy, for there was a rain-water 
pump from which I could get water. But 
neither force nor kindness availed : he was 
indeed beyond reason. He would neither 
desist from his attacks on the tood nor from his 
noisy babbling to himself. The rudimentary 
precautions to keep our imprisonment endurable he would not observe. Slowly I began to 
realize the complete overthrow of his intelligence, to perceive that my sole companion in 
this close and sickly darkness was a man insane. 

From certain vague memories I am inclined 
to think my own mind wandered at times. I 
had strange and hideous dreams whenever I 
slept. It sounds strange, but I am inclined to 









The Death of the Curate 229 

think that the weakness and insanity of the 
curate warned me, braced me and kept me a 
sane man. 

On the eighth day he began to talk aloud 
instead of whisper, and nothing I could do 
would moderate his speech. 

' It is just, O God !' he would say over and 
over again. ' It is just. On me and mine be 
the punishment laid. We have sinned, we 
have fallen short. There was poverty, sorrow ; 
the poor were trodden in the dust, and I held 
my peace. I preached acceptable folly my 
God, what folly ! when I should have stood 
up, though I died for it, and called upon them 
to repent repent ! . . . Oppressors of the poor 
and needy. . . . The winepress of God !' 

Then he would suddenly revert to the matter 
of the food I withheld from him, praying, begging, weeping, at last threatening. He began 
to raise his voice I prayed him not to ; he 
perceived a hold on me he threatened he 
would shout and bring the Martians upon us. 
For a time that scared me ; but any concession 
would have shortened our chance of escape 
beyond estimating. I defied him, although I 
felt no assurance that he might not do this 
thing. But that day, at any rate, he did not. 
He talked with his voice rising slowly, through 



230 



The War of the Worlds 



the greater part of the eighth and ninth daysthreats, entreaties, mingled with a torrent 01 
half-sane and always frothy repentance for his 
vacant sham of God's service, such as made me 
pity him. Then he slept awhile, and began 
again with renewed strength, so loudly that I 
must needs make him desist. 

' Be still !' I implored. 

He rose to his knees, for he had been sitting 
in the darkness near the copper. 

' I have been still too long,' he said in a tone 
that must have reached the pit, ' and now I 
must bear my witness. Woe unto this unfaithful city ! Woe ! woe ! Woe ! woe ! woe ! to the 
inhabitants of the earth by reason of the other 
voices of the trumpet ' 

' Shut up !' I said, rising to my feet, and in 
terror lest the Martians should hear us. ' Foi 
God's sake ' 

' Nay,' shouted the curate at the top of hi 
voice, standing likewise and extending 
arms. ' Speak ! The word of the Lord is 
upon me.' 

In three strides he was at the door into the 
kitchen. 

' I must bear my witness. I go. It 
already been too long delayed.' 

I put out my hand and felt the meat-chopper 



The Death of the Curate 2 3 1 

hanging to the wall. In a flash I was after 
him. I was fierce with fear. Before he was 
half-way across the kitchen I had overtaken 
him. With one last touch of humanity I turned 
the blade back and struck him with the butt. 
He went headlong forward, and lay stretched on 
the ground. I stumbled over him, and stood 
panting. He lay still. 

Abruptly I heard a noise without, the run 
and smash of slipping plaster, and the triangular 
aperture in the wall was darkened. I looked 
up and saw the lower surface of a Handling 
Machine coming slowly across the hole. One 
of its gripping limbs curled amidst the debris ; 
another limb appeared, feeling its way over the 
fallen beams. I stood petrified, staring. Then 
I saw through a sort of glass plate near the 
edge of the body the face, as we may call it, 
and the large dark eyes of a Martian peering, 
and then a long metallic snake of tentacle came 
feeling slowly through the hole. 

I turned by an effort, stumbled over the 
curate, and stopped at the scullery door. The 
tentacle was now some way, two yards or more, 
in the room, and twisting and turning with 
queer sudden movements, this way and that. 
For a while I stood fascinated by that slow, 
fitful advance. Then, with a faint, hoarse cry, 

 

I forced myself across the scullery. I trembled 
violently ; I could scarcely stand upright. I 
opened the door of the coal-cellar, and stood 
there in the darkness, staring at the faintly lit 
doorway into the kitchen, and listening. Had 
the Martian seen me ? What was it doing 
now? 

Something was moving to and fro there, very 
quietly ; every now and then it tapped against 
the wall, or started on its movements with a 
faint metallic ringing, like the movement of 
keys on a split-ring. Then a heavy body I 
knew too well what was dragged across the 
floor of the kitchen towards the opening. Irresistibly attracted, I crept to the door and peeped 
into the kitchen. In the triangle of bright 
outer sunlight I saw the Martian in its Briareus 
of a Handling Machine, scrutinizing the curate's 
head. I thought at once that it would infer 
my presence from the mark of the blow I had 
given him. 

I crept back to the coal-cellar, shut the door, 
and began to cover myself up as much as I 
could, and as noiselessly as possible, in the 
darkness, among the firewood and coal therein. 
Every now and then I paused rigid, to hear if 
the Martian had thrust its tentacle through the 
opening again. 






The Death of the Curate 233 

Then the faint metallic jingle returned. I 
traced it slowly feeling over the kitchen. 
Presently I heard it nearer in the scullery, as 
I judged. I thought that its length might be 
insufficient to reach me. I prayed copiously. 
It passed, scraping faintly across the cellar door. 
An age of almost intolerable suspense intervened ; then I heard it fumbling at the latch. 
It had found the door ! The Martian understood doors ! 

It worried at the catch for a minute, perhaps, 
and then the door opened. 

In the darkness I could just see the thing 
like an elephant trunk more than anything else 
waving towards me and touching and examining the wall, coals, wood, and ceiling. It was 
like a black worm swaying its blind head to and 
fro. 

Once, even, it touched the heel of my boot. 
I was on the verge of screaming ; I bit my 
hand. For a time it was silent. I could have 
fancied it had been withdrawn. Presently, with 
an abrupt click, it gripped something I thought 
[j: had me ! and seemed to go out of the cellar 
again. For a minute I was not sure. Apparently, 
it had taken a lump of coal to examine. 

I seized the opportunity of slightly shifting 
my position, which had become cramped, and 

 

listened. I whispered passionate prayers for 
safety. 

Then I heard the slow, deliberate sound 
creeping towards me again. Slowly, slowly it 
drew near, scratching against walls and tapping 
furniture 

While I was still doubtful, it rapped smartly 
against the cellar door and closed it. I heard 
it go into the pantry, and the biscuit-tins rattled 
and a bottle smashed, and then came a heavy 
bump against the cellar door. Then silence, 
that passed into an infinity of suspense. 

Had it gone ? 

At last I decided that it had. 

It came into the scullery no more ; but I lay 
all the tenth day, in the close darkness, buried 
among coals and firewood, not daring even to 
crawl out for the drink for which I craved. It 
was the eleventh day before I ventured so far 
from my security. 




V. 

THE STILLNESS. 

MY first act, before I went into the pantry, was 
to fasten the door between kitchen and scullery. 
But the pantry was empty ; every scrap of food 
had gone. Apparently, the Martian had taken 
it all on the previous day. At that discovery I 
despaired for the first time. I took no food and 
no drink either on the eleventh or the twelfth 
day. 

At first my mouth and throat were parched, 
and my strength ebbed sensibly. I sat about 
in the darkness of the scullery, in a state of 
despondent wretchedness. My mind ran on 
eating. I thought I had become deaf, for the 
noises of movement I had been accustomed to 
hear from the pit ceased absolutely. I did not 
feel strong enough to crawl noiselessly to the 
peephole, or I would have gone there. 

On the twelfth day my throat was so painful 
that, taking the chance of alarming the Martians, 
I attacked the creaking rain-water pump that 

 

stood by the sink, and got a couple of glassfuls 
of blackened and tainted rain-water. I was 
greatly refreshed by this, and emboldened by 
the fact that no inquiring tentacle followed the 
noise of my pumping. 

During these days I thought much of the 
curate, and of the manner of his death, in a 
rambling, inconclusive manner. 

On the thirteenth day I drank some more 
water, and dozed and thought disjointedly of 
eating and of vague impossible plans of escape. 
Whenever I dozed, I dreamt of horrible phantasms, of the death of the curate, or of 
sumptuous dinners ; but, sleeping or awake, I 
felt a keen pain that urged me to drink again 
and again. The light that came into the 
scullery was no longer grey but red. To my 
disordered imagination it seemed the colour of 
blood. 

On the fourteenth day I went into the kitchen, 
and I was surprised to find that the fronds of 
the Red Weed had grown right across the hole 
in the wall, turning the half-light of the place 
into a crimson-coloured obscurity. 

It was early on the fifteenth day that I heard 
a curious familiar sequence of sounds in the 
kitchen, and, listening, identified it as the snuffing and scratching of a dog. Going into the 



The Stillness 237 

kitchen, I saw a dog's nose peering in through 
a break among the ruddy fronds. This greatly 
surprised me. At the scent of me he barked 
shortly. 

I thought if I could induce him to come into 
the place quietly I should be able, perhaps, to 
kill and eat him, and in any case it would be 
advisable to kill him, lest his actions attracted 
the attention of the Martians. 

I crept forward, saying ' Good dog !' very 
softly ; but he suddenly withdrew his head and 
disappeared. 

I listened I was not deaf but certainly the 
pit was still. I heard a sound like the flutter of 
a bird's wings, and a hoarse croaking, but that 
was all. 

For a long while I lay close to the peephole, 
but not daring to move aside the red plants 
that obscured it. Once or twice I heard a faint 
pitter-patter like the feet of the dog going 
hither and thither on the sand far below me, 
and there were more bird-like sounds, but that 
was all. At length, encouraged by the silence, 
4 looked out. 

Except in the corner, where a multitude of 
crows hopped and fought over the skeletons of 
the dead the Martians had consumed, there 
was not a living thing in the pit. 

 

I stared about me, scarcely believing my 
eyes. All the machinery had gone. Save for 
the big mound of grayish-blue powder in one 
corner, certain bars of aluminium in another, 
the black birds and the skeletons of the killed, 
the place was merely an empty circular pit in 
the sand. 

Slowly I thrust myself out through the red 
weed, and stood up on the mound of rubble. 
I could see in any direction save behind me, 
to the north, and neither Martian nor sign of 
Martian was to be seen. The pit dropped 
sheerly from my feet, but a little way along, 
the rubbish afforded a practicable slope to the 
summit of the ruins. My chance of escape 
had come. I began to tremble. 

I hesitated for some time, and then, in a gust 
of desperate resolution and with a heart that 
throbbed violently, I scrambled to the top of 
the mound in which I had been buried so long. 

I looked about again. To the northward, 
too, no Martian was visible. 

When I had last seen this part of Sheen in 
the daylight, it had been a straggling street of 
comfortable white and red houses, interspersed 
with abundant shady trees. Now I stood on a 
mound of smashed brickwork, clay and gravel, 
over which spread a multitude of red cactus


The Stillness 239 

shaped plants, knee-high, without a solitary 
terrestrial growth to dispute their footing. The 
trees near me were dead and brown, but further, 
a network of red threads scaled the still living 
stems. 

The neighbouring houses had all been 
wrecked, but none had been burned ; their walls 
stood sometimes to the second story, with 
smashed windows and shattered doors. The 
Red Weed grew tumultuously in their roofless 
rooms. Below me was the great pit, with the 
crows struggling for its refuse. A number of 
other birds hopped about among the ruins. 
Far away I saw a gaunt cat slink crouchingly 
along a wall, but traces of men there were 
none. 

The day seemed, by contrast with my recent 
confinement, dazzlingly bright, the sky a glowing blue. A gentle breeze kept the Red Weed, 
that covered every scrap of unoccupied ground, 
gently swaying. And oh ! the sweetness of 
the air ! 



VI. 

THE WORK OF FIFTEEN DAYS. 

FOR some time I stood tottering on the mound, 
regardless of my safety. Within that noisome 
den from which I had emerged, I had thought 
with a narrow intensity only of our immediate 
security. I had not realized what had been 
happening to the world, had not anticipated 
this startling vision of unfamiliar things. I 
had expected to see Sheen in ruins I found 
about me the landscape, weird and lurid, of 
another planet. 

For that moment I touched an emotion 
beyond the common range of men, yet one 
that the poor brutes we dominate know only 
too well. I felt as a rabbit might feel returning to his burrow, and suddenly confronted by 
the work of a dozen busy navvies digging the 
foundations of a house. I felt the first inkling 
of a thing that presently grew quite clear in 
my mind, that oppressed me for many days, a 
sense of dethronement, a persuasion that I was 



The Work of Fifteen Days 241 

no longer a master, but an animal among the 
animals, under the Martian heel. With us it 
would be as with them, to lurk and watch, to 
run and hide ; the fear and empire of man had 
passed away. 

But so soon as this strangeness had been 
realized, it passed, and my dominant motive 
became the hunger of my long and dismal fast. 
In the direction away from the pit, I saw, beyond a red-covered wall, a patch of garden 
ground unburied. This gave me a hint, and I 
went knee-deep, and sometimes neck-deep, in 
the Red Weed. The density of the weed gave 
me a reassuring sense of hiding. The wall 
was some six feet high and when I attempted 
to clamber it I found I could not lift my feet to 
the crest. So I went along by the side of it, 
and came to a corner and a rockwork that 
enabled me to get to the top and tumble into 
the garden I coveted. Here I found some 
young onions, a couple of gladiolus bulbs, and 
a quantity of immature carrots, all of which I 
secured, and, scrambling over a ruined wall, 
jent on my way through scarlet and crimson 
trees towards Kew it was like walking through 
an avenue of gigantic blood-drops possessed 
with two ideas : to get more food, and to limp, 
as soon and as far as my strength permitted, 

16 

 

out of this accursed unearthly region of the 
pit. 

Some way further, in a grassy place, was a 
group of mushrooms, which I also devoured, 
and then I came upon a brown sheet of flowing 
shallow water, where meadows used to be. 
These fragments of nourishment served only 
to whet my hunger. At first I was surprised 
at this flood in a hot, dry summer, but afterwards I discovered that this was caused by the 
tropical exuberance of the Red Weed. Directly 
this extraordinary growth encountered water, 
it straightway became gigantic and of unparalleled fecundity. Its seeds were simply poured 
down into the water of the Wey and Thames, 
and its swiftly-growing and Titanic waterfronds speedily choked both these rivers. 

At Putney, as I afterwards saw, the bridge 
was almost lost in a tangle of this weed, and at 
Richmond, too, the Thames water poured in a 
broad and shallow stream across the meadows 
of Hampton and Twickenham. As the waters 
spread the weed followed them, until the ruined 
villas of the Thames Valley were for a time lost 
in this red swamp, whose margin I explored, 
and much of the desolation the Martians had 
caused was concealed. 

In the end the Red Weed succumbed almost 






The Work of Fifteen Days 243 

as quickly as it spread. A cankering disease, 
due, it is believed, to the action of certain 
bacteria, presently seized upon it. Now, by 
the action of natural selection, all terrestrial 
plants have acquired a resisting power against 
bacterial diseases they never succumb without 
a severe struggle ; but the Red Weed rotted 
like a thing already dead. The fronds became 
bleached, and then shrivelled and brittle. They 
broke off at the least touch, and the waters that 
had stimulated their early growth carried their 
last vestiges out to sea. . . . 

My first act on coming to this water was, of 
course, to slake my thirst. I drank a great 
bulk of water, and, moved by an impulse, 
gnawed some fronds of Red Weed ; but they 
were watery, and had a sickly metallic taste. I 
found the water was sufficiently shallow for me 
to wade securely, although the Red Weed impeded my feet a little ; but the flood evidently 
got deeper towards the river, and I turned back 
towards Mortlake. I managed to make out 
the road by means of occasional ruins of its 
villas and fences and lamps, and so presently 
I got out of this spate, and made my way to 
the hill going up towards Roehampton, and 
came out on Putney Common. 

Here the scenery changed from the strange 

1 6 2 

 

and unfamiliar to the wreckage of the familiar ; 
patches of ground exhibited the devastation of 
a cyclone, and in a few score yards I would 
come upon perfectly undisturbed spaces, houses 
with their blinds trimly drawn and doors closed, 
as if they had been left for a day by the owners, 
or as if their inhabitants slept within. The Red 
Weed was less abundant ; the tall trees along 
the lane were free from the red creeper. I 
hunted for food among the trees, finding nothing, 
and I also raided a couple of silent houses, but 
they had already been broken into and ransacked. I rested for the remainder of the daylight in a shrubbery, being, in my enfeebled 
condition, too fatigued to push on. 

All this time I saw no human beings, and n< 
signs of the Martians. I encountered a couple 
of hungry-looking dogs, but both hurried circuitously away from the advances I made them. 
Near Roehampton I had seen two human 
skeletons not bodies, but skeletons, picked 
clean and in the wood by me I found the 
crushed and scattered bones of several cats and 
rabbits, and the skull of a sheep. But though 
I gnawed parts of these in my mouth, there 
was nothing to be got from them. 

After sunset, I struggled on along the road 
towards Putney, where I think the Heat- Ray 



The Work of Fifteen Days 245 

must have been used for some reason. And in a 
garden beyond Roehampton I got a quantity of 
immature potatoes sufficient to stay my hunger. 
From this garden one saw down upon Putney 
and the river. The aspect of the place in the 
dusk was singularly desolate : blackened trees, 
blackened, desolate ruins, and down the hill the 
sheets of the flooded river, red-tinged with the 
weed. And over all silence. It filled me with 
indescribable terror to think how swiftly that 
desolating change had come. 

For a time I believed that mankind had been 
swept out of existence, and that I stood there 
alone, the last man left alive. Hard by the top 
of Putney Hill I came upon another skeleton, 
with the arms dislocated and removed several 
yards from the rest of the body. As I proceeded. I became more and more convinced that 
the extermination of mankind was, save for such 
stragglers as myself, already accomplished in 
this part of the world. The Martians, I 
thought, had gone on, and left the country 
desolated, seeking food elsewhere. Perhaps 
even now they were destroying Berlin or 
Paris, or it might be they had gone northward. 



VII. 

THE MAN ON PUTNEY HILL. 

I SPENT that night in the inn that stands at the 
top of Putney Hill, sleeping in a made bed for 
the first time since my flight to Leatherhead. 
I will not tell the needless trouble I had breaking into that house afterwards I found the 
front-door was on the latch nor how I ransacked every room for food, until, just on the 
verge of despair, in what seemed to me to be a 
servant's bedroom, I found a rat-gnawed crust 
and two tinned pineapples. The place had 
been already searched and emptied. In the 
bar I afterwards found some biscuits and sandwiches that had been overlooked. The latter 
I could not eat, but the former not only stayed 
my hunger, but filled my pockets. I lit no 
lamps, fearing some Martian might come beating that part of London for food in the night. 
Before I went to bed I had an interval of restlessness, and prowled from window to window, 
peering out for some sign of these monsters. I 



The Man on Putney Hill 247 

slept little. As I lay in bed I found myself 
thinking consecutively a thing I do not remember to have done since my last argument 
with the curate. During all the intervening 
time my mental condition had been a hurrying 
succession of vague emotional states, or a sort 
of stupid receptivity. But in the night my 
brain, reinforced, I suppose, by the food I had 
eaten, grew clear again, and I thought. 

Three things struggled for possession of my 
mind : the killing of the curate, the whereabouts 
of the Martians, and the possible fate of my 
wife. The former gave me no sensation of 
horror or remorse to recall ; I saw it simply as 
a thing done, a memory infinitely disagreeable, 
but quite without the quality of remorse. I 
saw myself then as I see myself now, driven 
step by step towards that hasty blow, the 
creature of a sequence of accidents leading 
inevitably to that. I felt no condemnation ; 
yet the memory, static, unprogressive, haunted 
me. In the silence of the night, with that sense 
of the nearness of God that sometimes comes 
into the stillness and the darkness, I stood my 
trial, my only trial, for that moment of wrath 
and fear. I retraced every step of our con versation from the moment when I had found 
him crouching beside me, heedless of my thirst, 

 

and pointing to the fire and smoke that streamed 
up from the ruins of Weybridge. We had 
been incapable of co-operation grim chance 
had taken no heed of that. Had I foreseen, I 
should have left him at Halliford. But I did 
not foresee ; and crime is to foresee and do. 
And I set this down as I have set all this story 
down, as it was. There were no witnessesall these things I might have concealed. But 
I set it down, and the reader must form his 
judgment as he will. 

And when, by an effort, I had set aside that 
picture of a prostrate body, I faced the problem 
of the Martians and the fate of my wife. For 
the former I had no data ; I could imagine a 
hundred things, and so, unhappily, I could for 
the latter. And suddenly that night became 
terrible. I found myself sitting up in bed, 
staring at the dark. I found myself praying 
that y have suddenly and 
painlessly struck her out of being. Since the 
night of my return from Leatherhead I had not 
prayed. I had uttered prayers, fetich prayers, 
had prayed as heathens mutter charms when I 
was in extremity ; but now I prayed indeed, 
pleading steadfastly and sanely, face to face 
with the darkness of God. Strange night ! 
strangest in this, that so soon as dawn had 



The Man on Putney Hill 249 

come, I, who had talked with God, crept out of 
the house like a rat leaving its hiding-place a 
creature scarcely larger, an inferior animal, a 
thing that for any passing whim of our masters 
might be hunted and killed. Perhaps they also 
prayed confidently to God. Surely, if we have 
learnt nothing else, this war has taught us pity 
pity for those witless souls that suffer our 
dominion. 

The morning was bright and fine, and the 
eastern sky glowed pink, and was fretted with 
little golden clouds. In the road that runs from 
the top of Putney Hill to Wimbledon was a 
number of pitiful vestiges of the panic torrent 
that must have poured London ward on the 
Sunday night after the fighting began. There 
was a little two-wheeled cart inscribed with the 
name of Thomas Lobb, Greengrocer, New 
Maiden, with a smashed wheel and an abandoned tin trunk ; there was a straw hat 
trampled into the now hardened mud, and 
at the top of West Hill a lot of blood-stained 
glass about the overturned water-trough. My 
movements were languid, my plans of the 
vaguest. I had an idea of going to Leatherhead, though I knew that there I had the 
poorest chance of finding my wife. Certainly, 
unless death had overtaken them suddenly, my 

 

cousins and she would have fled thence ; but 
it seemed to me I might find or learn there 
whither the Surrey people had fled. I knew I 
wanted to find my wife, that my heart ached 
for her and the world of men, but I had no 
clear idea how the finding might be done. I 
was also clearly aware now of my intense 
loneliness. From the corner I went, under 
cover of a thicket of trees and bushes, to the 
edge of Wimbledon Common, stretching wide 
and far. 

That dark expanse was lit in patches by 
yellow gorse and broom ; there was no Red 
Weed to be seen, and as I prowled, hesitating, 
on the verge of the open, the sun rose, flooding 
it all with light and vitality. I came upon a 
busy swarm of little frogs in a swampy place 
among the trees. I stopped to look at them, 
drawing a lesson from their stout resolve to 
live. And presently, turning suddenly, with 
an odd feeling of being watched, I beheld 
something crouching amidst a clump of bushes. 
I stood regarding this. I made a step towards 
it, and it rose up, and became a man armed 
with a cutlass. I approached him slowly. He 
stood silent and motionless, regarding me. 

As I drew nearer, I perceived he was dressed 
in clothes as dusty and filthy as my own ; he 



The Man on Putney Hill 251 

looked, indeed, as though he had been dragged 
through a culvert. Nearer, I distinguished the 
green slime of ditches mixing with the pale 
drab of dried clay and shiny coaly patches. 
His black hair fell over his eyes, and his face 
was dark and dirty and sunken, so that at first 
I did not recognise him. There was a red cut 
across the lower part of his face. ,
4 Stop !' he cried, when I was within ten 
yards of him, and I stopped. His voice was 
hoarse. ' Where do you come from ?' he said. 

I thought, surveying him. 

' I come from Mortlake,' I said. ' I was 
buried near the pit the Martians made about 
their cylinder. I have worked my way out and 
escaped.' 

' There is no food about here,' he said. 
' This is my country. All this hill down to the 
river, and back to Clapham, and up to the edge 
of the Common. There is only food for one. 
Which way are you going ?' 

I answered slowly. 

' I don't know,' I said. ' I have been buried 
in the ruins of a house thirteen or fourteen days. 
I don't know what has happened.' 

He looked at me doubtfully, then started, and 
"looked with a changed expression. 

4 I've no wish to stop about here,' said I. 'I 

 

think I shall go to Leatherhead, for my wife 
was there.' 

He shot out a pointing finger. 

' It is you,' said he. ' The man from Woking. 
And you weren't killed at Weybridge ?' 

I recognised him at the same moment. 

' You are the artilleryman who came into my 
garden.' 

' Good luck !' he said. ' We are lucky ones ! 
Fancy you f He put out a hand, and I took it. 
' I crawled up a drain,' he said. ' But they 
didn't kill everyone. And after they went 
away I got off towards Walton across the fields. 

But It's not sixteen days altogether and 

your hair is gray.' He looked over his shoulder 
suddenly. Only a rook,' he said. ' One gets 
to know that birds have shadows these days. 
This is a bit open. Let us crawl under those 
bushes and talk.' 

' Have you seen any Martians ?' I said. 
' Since I crawled out ' 

' They've gone away across London,' he said. 
' I guess they've got a bigger camp there. Of 
a night, all over there, Hampstead way, the 
sky is alive with their lights. It's like a great 
city, and in the glare you can just see them 
moving. By daylight you can't. But nearer 
I haven't seen them ' He counted on his 



The Man on Putney Hill 253 

fingers. ' Five days. Then I saw a couple 
across Hammersmith way carrying something 
big. And the night before last' he stopped, 
and spoke impressively ' it was just a matter 
of lights, but it was something up in the air. 
I believe they've built a flying-machine, and are 
learning to fly.' 

I stopped, on hands and knees, for we had 
come to the bushes. 

'Fly!' 

'Yes he said, 'fly.' 

I went on into a little bower, and sat down. 

' It is all over with humanity,' I said. ' If 
they can do that, they will simply go round the 
world. ..." 

He nodded. 

' They will. But It will relieve things 

over here a bit. And besides ' He looked 

at me. ' Aren't you satisfied it is up with 
humanity ? I am. We're down ; we're beat.' 

I stared. Strange as it may seem, I had not 
arrived at this fact a fact perfectly obvious so 
soon as he spoke. I had still held a vague 
hope ; rather, I had kept a lifelong habit of 
mind. He repeated his words, ' We're beat. 1 
They carried absolute conviction. 

' It's all over,' he said. ' They've lost one 
just one. And they've made their footing good, 

 

and crippled the greatest power in the world. 
They've walked over us. The death of that 
one at Weybridge was an accident. And these 
are only pioneers. They keep on coming. 
These green stars I've seen none these five 
or six days, but I've no doubt they're falling 
somewhere every night. Nothing's to be done. 
We're under ! We're beat !' 

I made him no answer. I sat staring before 
me, trying in vain to devise some countervailing thought. 

' This isn't a war,' said the artilleryman. ' It 
never was a war, any more than there's war 
between men and ants.' 

Suddenly I recalled the night in the 
observatory. 

' After the tenth shot they fired no more at 
least, until the first cylinder came.' 

'How do you know ?' said the artilleryman. 
I explained. He thought. ' Something wrong 
with the gun,' he said. ' But what if there is ? 
They'll get it right again. And even if there's 
a delay, how can it alter the end? It's just 
men and ants. There's the ants builds their 
cities, live their lives, have wars, revolutions, 
until the men want them out of the way, and 
then they go out of the way. That's what we 
are now just ants. Only ' 



The Man on Putney Hill 255 

'Yes,' I said. 

' We're eatable ants.' 

We sat looking at each other. 

' And what will they do with us ?' I said. 

1 That's what I've been thinking,' he said 
' that's what I've been thinking. After Weybridge I went south thinking. I saw what 
was up. Most of the people were hard at 
it squealing and exciting themselves. But 
I'm not so fond of squealing. I've been in 
sight of death once or twice ; I'm not an ornamental soldier, and at the best and worst, 
death it's just death. And it's the man that 
keeps on thinking comes through. I saw everyone tracking away south. Says I, " Food won't 
last this way," and I turned right back. I went 
for the Martians like a sparrow goes for man. 
All round ' he waved a hand to the horizon 
' they're starving in heaps, bolting, treading on 
each other. ..." 

He saw my face, and halted awkwardly. 

' No doubt lots who had money have gone 
away to France,' he said. He seemed to hesitate 
whether to apologize, met my eyes, and went 
on : ' There's food all about here. Canned 
things in shops ; wines, spirits, mineral waters ; 
and the water mains and drains are empty. 
Well, I was telling you what I was thinking. 



256 



The War of the Worlds 



" Here's intelligent things," I said, " and it 
seems they want us for food. First, they'll 
smash us up ships, machines, guns, cities, all 
the order and organization. All that will go. 
If we were the size of ants, we might pull 
through. But we're not. It's all too bulky tc 
stop. That's the first certainty." Eh ?' 

I assented. 

' It is ; I've thought it out. Very well, ther 
next : at present we're caught as we're wantec 
A Martian has only to go a few miles to get 
crowd on the run. And I saw one, one d 
out by Wandsworth, picking houses to piec< 
and routing among the wreckage. But thej 
won't keep on doing that. So soon as they've 
settled all our guns and ships, and smashed oui 
railways, and done all the things they ar 
doing over there, they will begin catching uj 
systematic, picking the best and storing us ii 
cages and things. That's what they will stai 
doing in a bit. Lord ! they haven't begun 01 
us yet. Don't you see that ?' 

' Not begun !' I exclaimed. 

' Not begun. All that's happened so far is 
through our not having the sense to keep quiet 
worrying them with guns and such fooler 
And losing our heads, and rushing off in crowc 
to where there wasn't any more safety thai 



The Man on Putney Hill 257 

where we were. They don't want to bother us 
yet. They're making their things making all 
the things they couldn't bring with them, getting things ready for the rest of their people. 
Very likely that's why the cylinders have 
stopped for a bit, for fear of hitting those who 
are here. And instead of our rushing about 
blind, on the howl, or getting dynamite on the 
chance of busting them up, we've got to fix 
ourselves up according to the new state of 
affairs. That's how I figure it out. It isn't 
quite according to what a man wants for his 
species, but it's about what the facts point to. 
And that's the principle I acted upon. Cities, 
nations, civilization, progress it's all over. 
That game's up. We're beat.' 

' But if that is so, what is there to live for ?' 

The artilleryman looked at me for a moment. 

' There won't be any more blessed concerts 
for a million years or so ; there won't be any 
Royal Academy of Arts, and no nice little feeds 
at restaurants. If it's amusement you're after, 
I reckon the game is up. If you've got any 
drawing-room manners, or a dislike to eating 
peas with a knife or dropping aitches, you'd 
better chuck 'em away. They ain't no further 
j&se.' 

' You mean ' 

17 



2 5 8 



The War of the Worlds 



' I mean, that men like me are going on 
living for the sake of the breed. I tell you, 
I'm grim set on living. And, if I'm not mistaken, you'll show what insides youve got, too, 
before long. We aren't going to be exterminated. And I don't mean to be caught, 
either, and tamed and fattened and bred like 
a thundering ox. Ugh ! Fancy those brown 
creepers !' 

' You don't mean to say ' 

' I do. I'm going on. Under their feet. 
I've got it planned ; I've thought it out. We 
men are beat. We don't know enough. We've 
got to learn before we've got a chance. And 
we've got to live, and keep independent while 
we learn. See ? That's what has to be done.' 

I stared, astonished, and stirred profoundly 
by the man's resolution. 

' Great God !' cried I. 'But you are a man 
indeed !' And suddenly I gripped his hand. 

' Eh ?' he said, with his eyes shining. ' I've 
thought it out, eh ?' 

' Go on I said. 

' Well, those who mean to escape their catching must get ready. I'm getting ready. Mind 
you, it isn't all of us are made for wild beasts ; 
and that's what it's got to be. That's why I 
watched you. I had my doubts. You're thin 



The Man on Putney Hill 259 

and slender. I didn't know it was you, you 
see, or just how you'd been buried. All 
these the sort of people that lived in these 
houses, and all those damn little clerks that 
used to live down that way they'd be no 
good. They haven't any spirit in them no 
proud dreams and no proud lusts ; and a man 
who hasn't one or the other Lord ! what is he 
but funk and precautions ? They just used to 
skedaddle off to work I've seen hundreds of 
'em, bit of breakfast in hand, running wild and 
shining to catch their little season-ticket train, 
for fear they'd get dismissed if they didn't ; 
working at businesses they were afraid to take 
the trouble to understand ; skedaddling back 
for fear they wouldn't be in time for dinner ; 
keeping indoors after dinner for fear of the 
back-streets ; and sleeping with the wives they 
married, not because they wanted them, but 
because they had a bit of money that would 
make for safety in their one little miserable 
skedaddle through the world. Lives insured 
and a bit invested for fear of accidents. And 
on Sundays fear of the hereafter. As if hell 
was built for rabbits ! Well, the Martians will 
just be a godsend to these. Nice roomy cages, 
fattening food, careful breeding, no worry. 
After a week or so chasing about the fields and 

17 2 

 

lands on empty stomachs, they'll come and be 
caught cheerful. They'll be quite glad after a 
bit. They'll wonder what people did before 
there were Martians to take care of them. 
And the bar-loafers, and mashers, and singers 
I can imagine them. I can imagine them,' 
he said, with a sort of sombre gratification. 
' There'll be any amount of sentiment and 
religion loose among them. There's hundreds 
of things I saw with my eyes, that I've only 
begun to see clearly these last few days. 
There's lots will take things as they are, fat 
and stupid ; and lots will be worried by a sort 
of feeling that it's all wrong, and that they 
ought to be doing something. Now, whenever things are so that a lot of people feel 
they ought to be doing something, the weak, 
and those who go weak with a lot of complicated thinking, always make for a sort of donothing religion, very pious, and superior, and 
submit to persecution and the will of the 
Lord. Very likely you've seen the same 
thing. It's energy in a gale of funk, and 
turned clean inside out. These cages will be 
full of psalms and hymns and piety. And 
those of a less simple sort will work in a bit 
of what is it ? eroticism.' 
He paused. 



The Man on Putney Hill 261 

' Very likely these Martians will make pets 
of some of them ; train them to do tricks who 
knows ? get sentimental over the pet boy 
who grew up and had to be killed. And 
some, maybe, they will train to hunt us.' 

' No,' I cried, ' that's impossible ! No human 
being ' 

' What's the good of going on with such 
lies ?' said the artilleryman. ' There's men 
who'd do it cheerful. What nonsense to 
pretend there isn't !' 

And I succumbed to his conviction. 
 If they come after me,' he said ' Lord ! 
if they come after me !' and subsided into a 
grim meditation. 

I sat contemplating these things. I could 
find nothing to bring against this man's reasoning. In the days before the invasion no one 
would have questioned my intellectual superiority to his I, a professed and recognised 
writer on philosophical themes, and he, a 
common soldier and yet he had already 
formulated a situation that I had scarcely 
realized. 

' What are you doing ?' I said presently. 
' What plans have you made ?' 

He hesitated. 

'Well, it's like this,' he said. 'What have 

 

we to do ? We have to invent a sort of life 
where men can live and breed, and be sufficiently secure to bring the children up. Yeswait a bit, and I'll make it clearer what I think 
ought to be done. The tame ones will go like 
all tame beasts ; in a few generations they'll be 
big, beautiful, rich-blooded, stupid rubbish ! 
The risk is that we who keep wild will go 
savage degenerate into a sort of big savage 
rat. . . . You see, how I mean to live is underground. I've been thinking about the drains. 
Of course, those who don't know drains think 
horrible things ; but under this London are 
miles and miles hundreds of miles and a 
few days' rain and London empty will leave 
them sweet and clean. The main drains are 
big enough and airy enough for anyone. Then 
there's cellars, vaults, stores, from which bolting 
passages may be made to the drains. And the 
railway tunnels and subways. Eh ? You begin 
to see ? And we form a band able-bodied, 
clean-minded men. We're not going to pick 
up any rubbish that drifts in. Weaklings go 
out again.' 

' As you meant me to go ?' 

'Well I parleyed, didn't I ?' 

' We won't quarrel about that. Go on.' 

' Those who stop, obey orders. Able-bodied, 



The Man on Putney Hill 263 

clean-minded women we want also mothers 
and teachers. No lackadaisical ladies no 
blasted rolling eyes. We can't have any weak 
or silly. Life is real again, and the useless 
and cumbersome and mischievous have to die. 
They ought to die. They ought to be willing 
to die. It's a sort of disloyalty, after all, to live 
and taint the race. And they can't be happy. 
Moreover, dying's none so dreadful ; it's the 
funking makes it bad. And in all those places 
we shall gather. Our district will be London. 
And we may even be able to keep a watch, 
and run about in the open when the Martians 
keep away. Play cricket, perhaps. That's 
how we shall save the race. Eh ? It's a 
possible thing ? But saving the race is nothing 
in itself. As I say, that's only being rats. It's 
saving our knowledge and adding to it is the 
thing. There men like you come in. There's 
books, there's models. We must make great 
safe places down deep, and get all the books 
we can ; not novels and poetry swipes, but 
ideas, science books. That's where men like 
you come in. We must go to the British 
Museum and pick all those books through. 
Especially we must keep up our science learn 
more. We must watch these Martians. Some 
of us must go as spies. When it's all working, 

 

perhaps I will. Get caught, I mean. And 
the great thing is, we must leave the Martians 
alone. We mustn't even steal. If we get in 
their way, we clear out. We must show them 
we mean no harm. Yes, I know. But they're 
intelligent things, and they won't hunt us down 
if they have all they want, and think we're just 
harmless vermin.' 

The artilleryman paused, and laid a brown 
hand upon my arm. 

1 After all, it may not be so much we may 

have to learn before Just imagine this : 

Four or five of their Fighting Machines suddenly starting off Heat-Rays right and left, 
and not a Martian in 'em. Not a Martian in 'em, 
but men men who have learnt the way how. 
It may be in my time, even those men. Fancy 
having one of them lovely things, with its 
Heat- Ray wide and free ! Fancy having it in 
control ! What would it matter if you smashed 
to smithereens at the end of the run, after a 
bust like that ? I reckon the Martians '11 open 
their beautiful eyes ! Can't you see them, man ? 
Can't you see them hurrying, hurrying puffing 
and blowing and hooting to their other mechanical affairs ? Something out of gear in every 
case. And swish, bang, rattle, swish ! just as 
they are fumbling over it, swisk comes the 



The Man on Putney Hill 265 

Heat- Ray, and, behold ! man has come back 
to his own.' 

For a while the imaginative daring of the 
artilleryman, and the tone of assurance and 
courage he assumed, completely dominated my 
mind. I believed unhesitatingly both in his 
forecast of human destiny and in the practicability of his astonishing scheme, and the reader 
who thinks me susceptible and foolish must 
contrast his position, reading steadily, with all 
his thoughts about his subject, and mine, 
crouching fearfully in the bushes and listening, 
distracted by apprehension. We talked in this 
manner through the early morning time, and 
later crept out of the bushes, and, after scanning 
the sky for Martians, hurried precipitately to 
the house on Putney Hill where he had made 
his lair. It was the coal-cellar of the place, and 
when I saw the work he had spent a week 
upon it was a burrow scarcely ten yards long, 
which he designed to reach to the main drain 
on Putney Hill I had my first inkling of the 
gulf between his dreams and his powers. Such 
a hole I could have dug in a day. But I 
believed in him sufficiently to work with him all 
that morning until past mid-day at his digging. 
Ve had a garden barrow, and shot the earth we 
removed against the kitchen range. We re
 






freshed ourselves with a tin of mock-turtle soup 
and wine from the neighbouring pantry. I 
found a curious relief from the aching strangeness of the world in this steady labour. As we 
worked, I turned his project over in my mind, 
and presently objections and doubts began to 
arise ; but I worked there all the morning, so 
glad was I to find myself with a purpose again. 
After working an hour, I began to speculate on 
the distance one had to go before the cloaca 
was reached the chances we had of missing it 
altogether. My immediate trouble was why we 
should dig this long tunnel, when it was possible 
to get into the drain at once down one of the 
manholes, and work back to the house. It 
seemed to me, too, that the house was inconveniently chosen, and required a needless length 
of tunnel. And just as I was beginning to face 
these things, the artilleryman stopped digging, 
and looked at me. 

' We're working well,' he said. He put 
down his spade. ' Let us knock off a bit he 
said. ' I think it's time we reconnoitred from 
the roof of the house.' 

I was for going on, and after a little hesitation he resumed his spade ; and then suddenly 
I was struck by a thought. I stopped, and so 
did he at once. 



The Man on Putney Hill 267 
 Why were you walking about the Common,' 
I said, ' instead of being here ?' 

' Taking the air he said. ' I was coming 
back. It's safer by night.' 

' But the work ?' 

' Oh, one can't always work,' he said, and in 
a flash I saw the man plain. He hesitated, 
holding his spade. ' We ought to reconnoitre 
now,' he said, ' because if any come near they 
may hear the spades and drop upon us unaware.' 

I was no longer disposed to object. We 
went together to the roof and stood on a ladder 
peeping out of the roof door. No Martians 
were to be seen, and we ventured out on the 
tiles, and slipped down under shelter of the 
parapet. 

From this position a shrubbery hid the 
greater portion of Putney, but we could see the 
river below, a bubbly mass of Red Weed, and 
the low parts of Lambeth flooded and red. 
The red creeper swarmed up the trees about 
the old palace, and their branches stretched 
gaunt and dead, and set with shrivelled leaves, 
from amidst its clusters. It was strange how 
entirely dependent both these things were upon 
flowing water for their propagation. About us 
neither had gained a footing ; laburnums, pink 

 

mays, snowballs, and trees of arbor vitae, ro 
out of laurels and hydrangeas, green an 
brilliant, into the sunlight. Beyond Kensin 
ton dense smoke was rising, and that and 
blue haze hid the northward hills. 

The artilleryman began to tell me of the so 
of people who still remained in London. 

'One night last week,' he said, 'some fool 
got the electric light in order, and there was a 
Regent's Street and the Circus ablaze, crowde 
with painted and ragged drunkards, men an 
women, dancing and shouting till dawn, 
man who was there told me. And as the da 
came they beheld a Fighting Machine standin 
near by the Langham, and looking down a 
them. Heaven knows how long he had bee 
there. He came down the road towards them 
and picked up nearly a hundred too drunk o 
frightened to run away.' 

Grotesque gleam of a time no history wil 
ever fully describe ! 

From that, in answer to my questions, he 
came round to his grandiose plans again. He 
grew enthusiastic. He talked so eloquently of 
the possibility of capturing a Fighting Machine, 
that I more than half believed in him again. 
But now that I was beginning to understand 
something of his quality, I could divine th 






The Man on Putney Hill 269 

stress he laid on doing nothing precipitately. 
And I noted that now there was no question 
that he personally was to capture and fight the 
great machine. 

After a time we went down to the cellar. 
Neither of us seemed disposed to resume digging, and when he suggested a meal, I was 
nothing loath. He became suddenly very 
generous, and when we had eaten he went 
away, and returned with some excellent cigars. 
We lit these, and his optimism glowed. He 
was inclined to regard my coming as a great 
occasion. 

' There's some champagne in the cellar,' he 
said. 

'We can dig better on this Thames-side 
burgundy,' said I. 

' No,' said he ; ' I am host to-day. Champagne ! Great God ! we've a heavy enough 
task before us ! Let us take a rest, and gather 
strength while we may. Look at these blistered 
hands !' 

And pursuant to this idea of a holiday, he 
insisted upon playing cards after we had eaten. 
He taught me euchre, and after dividing London 
between us, I taking the northern side, and he 
the southern, we played for parish points. 
Grotesque and foolish as this will seem to the 

 

sober reader, it is absolutely true, and what 
is more remarkable, I found the card game 
and several others we played extremely interesting. 

Strange mind of man ! that, with our species 
upon the edge of extermination or appalling 
degradation, with no clear prospect before us 
but the chance of a horrible death, we could 
sit following the chance of this painted pasteboard and playing the 'joker' with vivid 
delight. Afterwards he taught me poker, 
and I beat him at three tough chess games. 
When dark came we were so interested that 
we decided to take the risk and light a 
lamp. 

After an interminable string of games, we 
supped, and the artilleryman finished the champagne. We continued smoking the cigars. He 
was no longer the energetic regenerator of his 
species I had encountered in the morning. He 
was still optimistic, but it was a less kinetic, a 
more thoughtful optimism. I remember he 
wound up with my health, proposed in a speech 
of small variety and considerable intermittence. 
I took a cigar, and went upstairs to look at the 
lights he had spoken of, that blazed so greenly 
along the Highgate hills. 

At first I stared across the London valley, 



The Man on Putney Hill 271 

unintelligently. The northern hills were 
shrouded in darkness ; the fires near Kensington glowed redly, and now and then an orangered tongue of flame flashed up and vanished in 
the deep blue night. All the rest of London 
was black. Then, nearer, I perceived a strange 
light, a pale violet-purple fluorescent glow, 
quivering under the night breeze. For a space 
I could not understand it, and then I knew that 
it must be the Red Weed from which this faint 
irradiation proceeded. With that realization, 
my dormant sense of wonder, my sense of 
the proportion of things, awoke again. I 
glanced from that to Mars, red and clear, glowing high in the west, and then gazed long and 
earnestly at the darkness of Hampstead and 
Highgate. 

I remained a very long time upon the roof, 
wondering at the grotesque changes of the day. 
I recalled my mental states from the midnight 
prayer to the foolish card-playing. I had a 
violent revulsion of feeling. I remember I 
flung away the cigar with a certain wasteful 
symbolism. My folly came to me with glaring 
exaggeration. I seemed a traitor to my wife 
and to my kind ; I was filled with remorse. I 
resolved to leave this strange undisciplined 
dreamer of great things to his drink and 



272 



The War of the Worlds 



gluttony, and to go on into London. Thei 
it seemed to me, I had the best chance of learning what the Martians and my fellow-men were 
doing. I was still upon the roof when the late 
moon rose. 



VIII. 

DEAD LONDON. 

AFTER I had , parted from the artilleryman, I 
went down the hill, and by the High Street 
across the bridge to Lambeth. The Red Weed 
was tumultuous at that time, and nearly choked 
the bridge roadway, but its fronds were already 
whitened in patches by the spreading disease 
that presently removed it so swiftly. 

At the corner of the lane that runs to Putney 
Bridge Station I found a man lying. He was 
as black as a sweep with the black dust, alive, 
but helplessly and speechlessly drunk. I could 
get nothing from him but curses and furious 
lunges at my head. I think I should have 
stayed by him but for the brutal type of his 
face. 

There was black dust along the roadway 
from the bridge onwards, and it grew thicker 
in Fulham. The streets were horribly quiet. 
I got food sour, hard, and mouldy, but quite 
eatable in a baker's shop here. Some way 

18 

 

towards Walham Green the streets became 
clear of powder, and I passed a white terrace of 
houses on fire ; the noise of the burning was ai 
absolute relief. Going on towards Brompton, 
the streets were quiet again. 

Here I came once more upon the blacl 
powder in the streets and upon dead bodies, 
saw altogether about a dozen in the length of 
the Fulham Road. They had been dead man) 
days, so that I hurried quickly past them. The 
black powder covered them over, and softenec 
their outlines. One or two had been disturbec 
by dogs. 

Where there was no black powder, it We 
curiously like a Sunday in the City, with the 
closed shops, the houses locked up and the 
blinds drawn, the desertion, and the stillness 
In some places plunderers had been at work 
but rarely at other than the provision and wineshops. A jeweller's window had been broken 
open in one place, but apparently the thief hac 
been disturbed, and a number of gold chains 
and a watch were scattered on the pavement 
I did not trouble to touch them. Further on 
was a tattered woman in a heap on a doorstep 
the hand that hung over her knee was gashed 
and bled down her rusty brown dress, and a 
smashed magnum of champagne formed a pool 



Dead London 275 

across the pavement. She seemed asleep, but 
she was dead. 

The further I penetrated into London, the 
profounder grew the stillness. But it was 
not so much the stillness of death it was the 
stillness of suspense, of expectation. At any 
time the destruction that had already singed the 
north-western borders of the Metropolis, and 
had annihilated Ealing and Kilburn, might 
strike among these houses and leave them 
smoking ruins. It was a city condemned and 
derelict. . . . 

In South Kensington the streets were clear 
of dead and of black powder. It was near 
South Kensington that I first heard the howling. It crept almost imperceptibly upon my 
senses. It was a sobbing alternation of two 
notes, ' Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,' keeping on perpetually. When I passed streets that ran 
northward, it grew in volume, and houses and 
buildings seemed to deaden and cut it off again. 
It came to a full tide down Exhibition Road. I 
stopped, staring towards Kensington Gardens, 
wondering at this strange remote wailing. It 
was as if that mighty desert of houses had 
found a voice for its fear and solitude. 

' Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,' wailed that superhuman 
note great waves of sound sweeping down the 

1 8 2 

 

broad, sunlit roadway, between the tall buildings on either side. I turned northward, 
marvelling, towards the iron gates of Hyde 
Park. I had half a mind to break into the 
Natural History Museum and find my way up 
to the summits of the towers, in order to see 
across the park. But I decided to keep to the 
ground, where quick hiding was possible, and 
so went on up the Exhibition Road. All the 
large mansions on either side of the road were 
empty and still, and my footsteps echoed 
against the sides of the houses. At the top, 
near the park gate, I came upon a strange 
sight a 'bus overturned, and the skeleton of a 
horse picked clean. I puzzled over this for 
a time, and then went on to the bridge over 
the Serpentine. The Voice grew stronger 
and stronger, though I could see nothing 
above the housetops on the north side of the 
park, save a haze of smoke to the northwest. 

' Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,' cried the Voice, coming, 
as it seemed to me, from the district about 
Regent's Park. The desolating cry worked 
upon my mind. The mood that had sustained 
me passed. The wailing took possession of 
me. I found I was intensely weary, footsore, 
and now again hungry and thirsty. 



Dead London 277 

It was already past noon. Why was I 
wandering alone in this city of the dead ? 
Why was I alone when all London was lying in 
state, and in its black shroud ? I felt intolerably 
lonely. My mind ran on old friends that I had 
forgotten for years. I thought of the poisons 
in the chemists' shops, of the liquors the winemerchants stored ; I recalled the two sodden 
creatures of despair who, so far as I knew, 
shared the city with myself. . . . 

I came into Oxford Street by the Marble 
Arch, and here again was black powder and 
several bodies, and an evil, ominous smell from 
the gratings of the cellars of some of the 
houses. I grew very thirsty after the heat 
of my long walk. With infinite trouble I 
managed to break into a public-house and get 
food and drink. I was weary after eating, 
and went into the parlour behind the bar, 
and slept on a black horsehair sofa I found 
there. 

I awoke to find that dismal howling still in 
my ears, ' Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla.' It was now 
dusk, and after I had routed out some biscuits 
and a cheese in the bar there was a meatsafe, but it contained nothing but maggots I 
wandered on through the silent residential 
squares to Baker Street Portman Square is 

 

the only one I can name and so came out at 
last upon Regent's Park. And as I emerged 
from the top of Baker Street, I saw far away 
over the trees in the clearness of the sunset the 
hood of the Martian giant from which this 
howling proceeded. 1 was not terrified. I 
came upon him as if it were a matter of 
course. I watched him for some time, but he 
did not move. He appeared to be standing and yelling, for no reason that I could 
discover. 

I tried to formulate a plan of action. That 
perpetual sound of ' Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,' confused my mind. Perhaps I was too tired to be 
very fearful. Certainly I was rather curious to 
know the reason of this monotonous crying 
than afraid. I turned back away from the 
park and struck into Park Road, intending to 
skirt the park, went along under shelter of the 
terraces, and got a view of this stationary howling Martian from the direction of St. John's 
Wood. A couple of hundred yards out of 
Baker Street I heard a yelping chorus, and 
saw, first a dog with a piece of putrescent red 
meat in his jaws coming headlong towards me, 
and then a pack of starving mongrels in pursuit of him. He made a wide curve to avoid 
me, as though he feared I might prove a fresh 






Dead London 281 

competitor. As the yelping died away dowl 
the silent road, the wailing sound of ' Ulla, ulla, 
ulla, ulla,' reasserted itself. 

I came upon the wrecked Handling Machine 
halfway to St. John's Wood Station. At first 
I thought a house had fallen across the road. 
It was only as I clambered among the ruins 
that I saw, with a start, this mechanical Samson 
lying, with its tentacles bent and smashed and 
twisted, among the ruins it had made. The 
fore-part was shattered. It seemed as if it had 
driven blindly straight at the house, and had 
been overwhelmed in its overthrow. It seemed 
to me then that this might have happened by a 
Handling Machine escaping from the guidance 
of its Martian. I could not clamber among 
the ruins to see it, and the twilight was now so 
far advanced that the blood with which its seat 
was smeared, and the gnawed gristle of the 
Martian that the dogs had left, was invisible 
tq me. 

Wondering still more at all that I had seen, 
I pushed on towards Primrose Hill. Far away, 
through a gap in the trees, I saw a second 
Martian, motionless as the first, standing in the 
park towards the Zoological Gardens, and silent. 
A little beyond the ruins about the smashed 
Handling Machine I came upon the Red Weed 

 

thgain, and found Regent's Canal a spongy mass 
of dark-red vegetation. 

Abruptly, as I crossed the bridge, the sound 
of ' Ulla, ulla, ulla,' ceased. It was, as it were, 
cut off. The silence came like a thunder-clap. 

The dusky houses about me stood faint, and 
tall and dim ; the trees towards the park were 
growing black. All about me the Red Weed 
clambered among the ruins, writhing to get 
above me in the dim. Night, the Mother of 
Fear and Mystery, was coming upon me. But 
while that voice sounded, the solitude, the 
desolation, had been endurable ; by virtue of it 
London had still seemed alive, and the sense of 
life about me had upheld me. Then suddenly 
a change, the passing of something I knew 
not what and then a stillness that could be 
felt. Nothing but this gaunt quiet. 

London about me gazed at me spectrally. 
The windows in the white houses were like the 
eye-sockets of skulls. About me my imagination found a thousand noiseless enemies moving. 
Terror seized me, a horror of my temerity. In 
front of me the road became pitchy black as 
though it was tarred, and I saw a contorted 
shape lying across the pathway. I could not 
bring myself to go on. I turned down St. 
John's Wood Road, and ran headlong from 






Dead London 281 

this unendurable stillness towards Kilburn. I 
hid from the night and the silence, until long 
after midnight, in a cabmen's shelter in the 
Harrow Road. But before the dawn my 
courage returned, and while the stars were 
still in the sky, I turned once more towards 
Regent's Park. I missed my way among the 
streets, and presently saw, down a long avenue, 
in the half-light of the early dawn, the curve of 
Primrose Hill. On the summit, towering up 
to the fading stars, was a third Martian, erect 
and motionless like the others. 

An insane resolve possessed me. I would 
die and end it. And I would save myself even 
the trouble of killing myself. I marched on 
recklessly towards this Titan, and then, as I 
drew nearer and the light grew, I saw that a 
multitude of black birds was circling and 
clustering about the hood. At that my heart 
gave a bound, and I began running along the 
road. 

I hurried through the Red Weed that choked 
St. Edmund's Terrace (I waded breast-high 
across a torrent of water that was rushing down 
from the waterworks towards the Albert Road), 
and emerged upon the grass before the rising 
of the sun. Great mounds had been heaped 
about the crest of the hill, making a huge re
 

doubt of it it was the final and largest place 
the Martians made and from behind these 
heaps there rose a thin smoke against the sky. 
Against the skyline an eager dog ran and disappeared. The thought that had flashed into 
my mind grew real, grew credible. I felt no 
fear, only a wild trembling exultation, as I ran 
up the hill towards the motionless monster. 
Out of the hood hung lank shreds of brown at 
which the hungry birds pecked and tore. 

In another moment I had scrambled up the 
earthen rampart and stood upon its crest, and 
the interior of the redoubt was below me. A 
mighty space it was, with gigantic machines 
here and there within it, huge mounds of 
material and strange shelter - places. And, 
scattered about it, some in their over-turned 
war-machines, some in the now rigid Handling 
Machines, and a dozen of them stark and silent 
and laid in a row, were the Martians dead  
slain by the putrefactive and disease bacteria 
against which their systems were unprepared ; 
slain as the Red Weed was being slain ; slain, 
after all man's devices had failed, by the 
humblest things that God, in His wisdom, has 
put upon this earth. 

For so it had come about, as, indeed, I and 
many men might have foreseen had not terror 



Dead London 283 

and disaster blinded our minds. These germs 
of disease have taken toll of humanity since 
the beginning of things taken toll of our prehuman ancestors since life began here. But by 
virtue of this natural selection of our kind we 
have developed resisting-power ; to no germs 
do we succumb without a struggle, and to many 
those that cause putrefaction in dead matter, 
for instance our living frames are altogether 
immune. But there are no bacteria in Mars, 
and directly these invaders arrived, directly 
they drank and fed, our microscopic allies began 
to work their overthrow. Already when I 
watched them they were irrevocably doomed, 
dying and rotting even as they went to and 
fro. It was inevitable. By the toll of a billion 
deaths, man has bought his birthright of the 
earth, and it is his against all comers ; it would 
still be his were the Martians ten times as 
mighty as they are. For neither do men live 
nor die in vain. 

Here and there they were scattered, nearly 
fifty altogether in that great gulf they had 
made, overtaken by a death that must have 
seemed to them as incomprehensible as any 
 death could be. To me also at that time this 
death was incomprehensible. All I knew was 
that these things that had been alive and so 

 

terrible to men were dead. For a moment 
believed that the destruction of Sennacheril 
had been repeated, that God had repented, that 
the Angel of Death had slain them in th< 
night. 

I stood staring into the pit, and my heat 
lightened gloriously, even as the rising sui 
struck the world to fire about me with his rays. 
The pit was still in darkness ; the mighty engines, so great and wonderful in their power 
and complexity, so unearthly in their tortuous 
forms, rose weird and vague and strange out ol 
the shadows towards the light. A multitude oi 
dogs, I could hear, fought over the bodies that 
lay darkly in the depth of the pit, far below me. 
Across the pit on its further lip, flat and vast 
and strange, lay the great flying-machine with 
which they had been experimenting upon our 
denser atmosphere when decay and death 
arrested them. Death had come not a day too 
soon. At the sound of a cawing overhead I 
looked up at the huge Fighting Machine, that 
would fight no more for ever, at the tattered 
red shreds of flesh that dripped down upon the 
overturned seats on the summit of Primrose 
Hill. 

I turned and looked down the slope of the 
hill to where, enhaloed now in birds, stood 



Dead London 285 

those other two Martians that I had seen overnight, just as death had overtaken them. The 
one had died, even as it had been crying to its 
companions ; perhaps it was the last to die, and 
its voice had gone on perpetually until the force 
of its machinery was exhausted. They glittered now, harmless tripod towers of shining 
metal, in the brightness of the rising sun. . . . 
All about the pit, and saved as by a miracle 
from everlasting destruction, stretched the great 
Mother of Cities. Those who have only seen 
London veiled in her sombre robes of smoke 
can scarcely imagine the naked clearness and 
beauty of the silent wilderness of houses. 

Eastward, over the blackened ruins of the 
Albert Terrace and the splintered spire of the 
church, the sun blazed dazzling in a clear sky, 
and here and there some facet in the great 
wilderness of roofs caught the light and glared 
with a white intensity. It touched even that 
round store place for wines by the Chalk Farm 
Station, and the vast railway yards, marked 
once with a graining of black rails, but redlined now with the quick rusting of a fortnight's 
disuse, with something of the mystery of beauty. 
 Northward were Kilburn and Hampstead, 
blue and crowded with houses ; westward the 
great city was dimmed ; and southward, beyond 

 

the Martians, the green waves of Regent's 
Park, the Langham Hotel, the dome of the 
Albert Hall, the Imperial Institute, and the 
giant mansions of the Brompton Road, came 
out clear and little in the sunrise, the jagged 
ruins of Westminster rising hazily beyond. 
Far away and blue were the Surrey hills, and 
the towers of the Crystal Palace glittered like 
two silver rods. The dome of St. Paul's We 
dark against the sunrise, and injured, I saw for 
the first time, by a huge gaping cavity on it 
western side. 

And as I looked at this wide expanse of 
houses and factories and churches, silent anc 
abandoned ; as I thought of the multitudinous 
hopes and efforts, the innumerable hosts of 
lives that had gone to build this human reef, 
and of the swift and ruthless destruction that 
had hung over it all ; when I realized that the 
shadow had been rolled back, and that men 
might still live in the streets, and this dear vast 
dead city of mine be once more alive and 
powerful, I felt a wave of emotion that 
near akin to tears. 

The torment was over. Even that day the 
healing would begin. The survivors of the 
people scattered over the country leaderless, 
lawless, foodless, like sheep without a shepherd 



Dead London 287 

the thousands who had fled by sea, would 
begin to return ; the pulse of life, growing 
stronger and stronger, would beat again in the 
empty streets, and pour across the vacant 
squares. Whatever destruction was done, the 
hand of the destroyer was stayed. The hand of 
the destroyer was stayed. All the gaunt wrecks, 
the blackened skeletons of houses that stared so 
dismally at the sunlit grass of the hill, would 
presently be echoing with the hammers of the 
restorers and ringing with the tapping of the 
trowels. At the thought I extended my hands 
towards the sky and began thanking God. In 
a year, thought I in a year. . . . 

And then, with overwhelming force, came the 
thought of myself, of my wife, and the old life 
of hope and tender helpfulness that had ceased 
for ever. 



IX. 

WRECKAGE. 

AND now comes the strangest thing in my stoi 
And yet, perhaps, it is not altogether strange. 
I remember, clearly and coldly and vividly, all 
that I did that day until the time that I stooc 
weeping and praising God upon the summit of 
Primrose Hill. And then I forget. . . . 

Of the next three days I know nothing, 
have learnt since that, so far from my being th( 
first discoverer of the Martian overthrow, several 
such wanderers as myself had already discovered 
this on the previous night. One man the 
first had gone to St. Martin's-le-Grand, and, 
while I sheltered in the cabmen's hut, had contrived to telegraph to Paris. Thence the joyful 
news had flashed all over the world ; a thousand 
cities, chilled by ghastly apprehensions, suddenly flashed into frantic illumination ; the) 
knew of it in Dublin, Edinburgh, Manchester, 
Birmingham, at the time when I stood upon 
the verge of the pit. Already men, weeping 



Wreckage 289 

with joy, as I have heard, shouting and staying 
their work to shake hands and shout, were 
making up trains, even as near as Crewe, to 
descend upon London. The church bells that 
had ceased a fortnight since suddenly caught 
the news, until all England was bell-ringing. Men on cycles, lean-faced, unkempt, 
scorched along every country lane, shouting ot 
unhoped deliverance, shouting to gaunt, staring 
figures of despair. And for the food ! Across 
the Channel, across the Irish Sea, across the 
Atlantic, corn, bread and meat were tearing to 
our relief. All the shipping in the world 
seemed going Londonward in those days. But 
of all this I have no memory. I drifted a 
demented man. I found myself in the house of 
kindly people who had found me on the third 
day, wandering, weeping and raving, through 
the streets of St. John's Wood. They have 
told me since that I was singing some inane 
doggerel about ' The Last Man Left Alive, 
Hurrah ! The Last Man Left Alive.' Troubled 
as they were with their own affairs, these people, 
whose name, much as I would like to express 
my gratitude to them, I may not even give 
here, nevertheless cumbered themselves with 
Ine, sheltered me and protected me from myself. Apparently they had learnt something 

19 

 

of my story from me during the days of my 
lapse. 

Very gently, when my mind was assure( 
again, did they break to me what they hac 
learnt of the fate of Leatherhead. Two days 
after I was imprisoned it had been destroyed, 
with every soul in it, by a Martian. He hac 
swept it out of existence, as it seemed, without 
any provocation, as a boy might crush an anthill, in the mere wantonness of power. 

I was a lonely man, and they were very kind 
to me. I was a lonely man and a sad one, 
and they bore with me. I remained with them 
four days after my recovery. All that time 
I felt a vague, a growing craving to look 
once more on whatever remained of the little 
life that seemed so happy and bright in my 
past. It was a mere hopeless desire to feast 
upon my misery. They dissuaded me. The) 
did all they could to divert me from this 
morbidity. But at last I could resist the impulse no longer, and promising faithfully to 
return to them, and parting, as I will confess, 
from these four-day friends with tears, I went 
out again into the streets that had lately been 
so dark and strange and empty. 

Already they were busy with returning 
people, in places even there were shops 



Wreckage 29 1 

open, and I saw a drinking fountain running 
water. 

I remember how mockingly bright the day 
seemed as I went back on my melancholy 
pilgrimage to the little house at Woking, how 
busy the streets and vivid the moving life about 
me. So many people were abroad everywhere, 
busied in a thousand activities, that it seemed 
incredible that any great proportion of the 
population could have been slain. But then I 
noticed how yellow were the skins of the people 
I met, how shaggy the hair of the men, how 
large and bright their eyes, and that every 
other man still wore his dirty rags. The faces 
seemed all with one of two expressions a 
leaping exultation and energy, or a grim resolution. Save for the expression of the faces, 
London seemed a city of tramps. The vestries 
were indiscriminately distributing bread sent us 
by the French Government. The ribs of the 
few horses showed dismally. Haggard special 
constables with white badges stood at the 
corners of every street. I saw little of the 
mischief wrought by the Martians until I 
reached Wellington Street, and there I saw 
the Red Weed clambering over the buttresses 
<!>f Waterloo Bridge. 

At the corner of the bridge, too, I saw one 

19 2 

 

of the common contrasts of that grotesque 
time : a sheet of paper flaunting against a 
thicket of the Red Weed, transfixed by a stick 
that kept it in place. It was the placard of the 
first newspaper to resume publication the 
Daily Mail. I bought a copy for a blackened 
shilling I found in my pocket. Most of it was 
in blank, but the solitary compositor who die 
the thing had amused himself by making 
grotesque scheme of advertisement stereo on 
the back page. The matter he printed We 
emotion ; the news organization had not as yet 
found its way back. I learnt nothing fresl 
except that already in one week the examination of the Martian mechanisms had yielded 
astonishing results. Among other things, the 
article assured me what I did not believe at the 
time : that the ' Secret of Flying ' was discovered. At Waterloo I found the free trains 
that were taking people to their homes. The 
first rush was already over. There were few 
people in the train, and I was in no mood for 
casual conversation. I got a compartment tc 
myself, and sat with folded arms, looking grayly 
at the sunlit devastation that flowed past the 
windows. And just outside the terminus the 
train jolted over temporary rails, and on either 
side of the railway the houses were blackened 



Wreckage 293 

ruins. To Clapham Junction the face of 
London was grimy with powder of the Black 
Smoke, in spite of two days of thunderstorms 
and rain, and at Clapham Junction the line had 
been wrecked again ; there were hundreds of 
out-of-work clerks and shopmen working side 
by side with the customary navvies, and we 
were jolted over a hasty relaying. 

All down the line from there the aspect of 
the country was gaunt and unfamiliar ; Wimbledon particularly had suffered. Walton, by 
virtue of its unburnt pine-woods, seemed the 
least hurt of any place along the line. The 
Wandle, the Mole, every little stream, was a 
heaped mass of Red Weed, in appearance 
between butcher's meat and pickled cabbage. 
The Surrey pine-woods were too dry, however, 
for the festoons of the red climber. Beyond 
Wimbledon, within sight of the line, in certain 
nursery grounds, were the heaped masses of 
earth about the sixth cylinder. A number of 
people were standing about it, and some 
sappers were busy in the midst of it. Over it 
flaunted a Union Jack, flapping cheerfully in 
the morning breeze. The nursery grounds 
, were everywhere crimson with the weed, a 
wide expanse of livid colour cut with purple 
shadows, and very painful to the eye. One's 

 

gaze went with infinite relief from the scorched 
grays and sullen reds of the foreground to the 
blue-green softness of the eastward hills. 

The line on the London side of Woking 
Station was still undergoing repair, so I 
descended at Byfleet Station and took the road 
to Maybury, past the place where I and the 
artilleryman had talked to the hussars, and 
on by the spot where the Martian had 
appeared to me in the thunderstorm. Here, 
moved by curiosity, I turned aside to find, 
among a tangle of red fronds, the warped and 
broken dogcart with the whitened bones of the 
horse, scattered and gnawed. For a time I 
stood regarding these vestiges. . . . 

Then I returned through the pine-wood, neckhigh with Red Weed here and there, to find 
the landlord of the Spotted Dog had already 
found burial ; and so came home past the 
College Arms. A man standing at an open 
cottage door greeted me by name as I passed. 

I looked at my house with a quick flash of 
hope that faded immediately. The door had 
been forced ; it was unfastened, and was opening slowly as I approached. 

It slammed again. The curtains of my 
study fluttered out of the open window from 
which I and the artilleryman had watched the 



Wreckage 295 

dawn. No one had closed that window since. 
The smashed bushes were just as I had left 
them nearly four weeks ago. I stumbled into 
the hall, and the house felt empty. The staircarpet was ruffled and discoloured where I had 
crouched soaked to the skin from the thunderstorm, the night of the catastrophe. Our 
muddy footsteps I saw still went up the stairs. 

I followed them to my study, and found lying 
on my writing-table still, with the selenite 
paper-weight upon] it, the sheet of work I had 
left on the afternoon of the opening of the 
cylinder. For a space I stood reading over my 
abandoned arguments. It was a paper on the 
probable development of Moral Ideas with the 
development of the civilizing process ; and the 
last sentence was the opening of a prophecy :  In about two hundred years,' I had written, 

' we may expect ' The sentence ended 

abruptly. I remembered my inability to fix my 
mind that morning, scarcely a month gone by, 
and how I had broken off to get my Daily 
Chronicle from the newsboy. I remembered 
how I went down to the garden gate as he 
came along, and how I had listened to his odd 
story of the ' Men from Mars.' 

I came down and went into the dining-room. 
There were the mutton and the bread, both far 

 

gone now in decay, and a beer bottle overturned, just as I and the artilleryman had left 
them. My home was desolate. I perceived 
the folly of the faint hope I had cherished so 
long. And then a strange thing occurred. 
'It is no use,' said a voice. 'The house is 
deserted. No one has been here these ten 
days. Do not stay here to torment yourself. 
No one escaped but you.' 

I was startled. Had I spoken my thought 
aloud ? I turned, and the French window was 
open behind me. I made a step to it, and 
stood looking out. 

And there, amazed and afraid, even as I 
stood amazed and afraid, were my cousin and 
my wife my wife white and tearless. She 
gave a faint cry. 

' I came,' she said. ' I knew knew ' 

She put her hand to her throat swayed. I 
made a step forward, and caught her in my 
arms. 



X. 

THE EPILOGUE. 

I CANNOT but regret, now that I am concluding 
my story, how little I am able to contribute to 
the discussion of the many debatable questions 
which are still unsettled. In one respect I 
shall certainly provoke criticism. My particular 
province is speculative philosophy. My knowledge of comparative physiology is confined to 
a book or two, but it seems to me that Carver's 
suggestions as to the reason of the rapid death 
of the Martians is so probable as to be regarded 
almost as a proven conclusion. I have assumed 
that in the body of my narrative. 

At any rate, in all the bodies of the Martians 
that were examined after the war, no bacteria 
except those already known as terrestrial species 
were found. That they did not bury any of 
their dead, and the reckless slaughter they perpetrated, point also to an entire ignorance of 
the putrefactive process. But probable as this 
seems, it is by no means a proven conclusion. 

 

Neither is the composition of the Black 
Smoke known, which the Martians used with 
such deadly effect, and the generator of the 
Heat- Ray remains a puzzle. The terrible 
disasters at the Ealing and South Kensington 
laboratories have disinclined analysts for further 
investigations upon the latter. Spectrum analysis of the black powder points unmistakably 
to the presence of an unknown element with a 
brilliant group of three lines in the green, and 
it is possible that it combines with argon to 
form a compound which acts at once with 
deadly effect upon some constituent in the 
blood. But such unproven speculations will 
scarcely be of interest to the general reader, to 
whom this story is addressed. None of the 
brown scum that drifted down the Thames after 
the destruction of Shepperton was examined at 
the time, and now none is forthcoming. 

The results of an anatomical examination of 
the Martians, so far as the prowling dogs had 
left such an examination possible, I have 
already given. But everyone is familiar with 
the magnificent and almost complete specimen 
in spirits at the Natural History Museum, and 
the countless drawings that have been made 
from it ; and beyond that the interest of the 
physiology and structure is purely scientific. 



The Epilogue 299 

A question of graver and universal interest is 
the possibility of another attack from the Martians. I do not think that nearly enough attention is being given to this aspect of the matter. 
At present the planet Mars is in conjunction, 
but with every return to opposition I, for one, 
anticipate a renewal of their adventure. In 
any case, we should be prepared. It seems to 
me that it should be possible to define the 
position of the gun from which the shots are 
discharged, to keep a sustained watch upon this 
part of the planet, and to anticipate the arrival 
of the next attack. 

In that case the cylinder might be destroyed 
with dynamite or artillery before it was sufficiently cool for the Martians to emerge, or 
they might be butchered by means of guns so 
soon as the screw opened. It seems to me 
that they have lost a vast advantage in the 
failure of their first surprise. Possibly they 
see it in the same light. 

Lessing had advanced excellent reasons for 
supposing that the Martians have actually succeeded in effecting a landing on the planet 
Venus. Seven months ago now, Venus and 
Mars were in alignment with the sun ; that is to 
say, Mars was in opposition from the point of 
view of an observer on Venus. Subsequently 



300 



The War of the Worlds 



a peculiar luminous and sinuous marking 
appeared on the unillumined half of the inner 
planet, and almost simultaneously a faint dark 
mark of a similar sinuous character was detected upon a photograph of the Martian disc. 
One needs to see the drawings of these appearances in order to appreciate fully their remarkable resemblance in character. 

At any rate, whether we expect another invasion or not, our views of the human future 
must be greatly modified by these events. 
\ We have learned now that we cannot regard 
' this planet as being fenced in and a secure 
abiding- place for Man ; we can never anticipate the unseen good or evil that may come 
upon us suddenly out of space. It may be 
that in the larger design of the universe this 
invasion from Mars is not without its ultimate 
benefit for men ; it has robbed us of that 
serene confidence in the future which is the 
most fruitful source of decadence, the gifts to 
human science it has brought are enormous, 
and it has done much to promote the conception of the commonweal of mankind. It 
may be that across the immensity of space 
the Martians have watched the fate of these 
pioneers of theirs and learned their lesson, and 
that on the planet Venus they have found a 



The Epilogue 301 

securer settlement. Be that as it may, for 
many years yet there will certainly be no relaxation of the eager scrutiny of the Martian 
disc, and those fiery darts of the sky, the 
shooting stars, will bring with them as they fall 
an unavoidable apprehension to all the sons of 
men. 

The broadening of men's views that has 
resulted can scarcely be exaggerated. Before 
the cylinder fell there was a general persuasion 
that through all the deep of space no life existed 
beyond the petty surface of our minute sphere. 
Now we see further. If the Martians can 
reach Venus, there is no reason to suppose that 
the thing is impossible for men, and when the 
slow cooling of the sun makes this earth uninhabitable, as at last it must do, it may be that the 
thread of life that has begun here will have 
streamed out and caught our sister planet within 
its toils. Should we conquer ? 

Dim and wonderful is the vision I have conjured up in my mind of life spreading slowly 
from this little seed-bed of the solar system 
throughout the inanimate vastness of sidereal 
space. But that is a remote dream. It may 
be, on the other hand, that the destruction of 
the Martians is only a reprieve. To them, and 
not to us, perhaps, is the future ordained. 

 

I must confess the stress and danger of the 
time have left an abiding sense of doubt am 
insecurity in my mind. I sit in my stud) 
writing by lamplight, and suddenly I see again 
the healing valley below set with writhing 
flames, and feel the house behind and about me 
empty and desolate. I go out into the By fleet 
Road, and vehicles pass me, a butcher-boy in a 
cart, a cabful of visitors, a workman on a 
bicycle, children going to school, and suddenly 
they become vague and unreal, and I hurry 
again with the artilleryman through the hot, 
brooding silence. Of a night I see the black 
powder darkening the silent streets, and the 
contorted bodies shrouded in that layer ; they 
rise upon me tattered and dog-bitten. They 
gibber and grow fiercer, paler, uglier, mad distortions of humanity at last, and I wake, cold 
and wretched, in the darkness of the night. 

I go to London and see the busy multitudes 
in Fleet Street and the Strand, and it comes 
across my mind that they are but the ghosts of 
the past, haunting the streets that I have seen 
silent and wretched, going to and fro, phantasms 
in a dead city, the mockery of life in a galvanized body. And strange, too, it is to stand on 
Primrose Hill, as I did but a day before writing 
this last chapter, to see the great province of 



The Epilogue 303 

houses, dim and blue through the haze of the 
smoke and mist, vanishing at last into the vague 
lower sky, to see the people walking to and fro 
among the flower-beds on the hill, to see the 
sightseers about the Martian machine that 
stands there still, to hear the tumult of playing 
children, and to recall the time when I saw it 
all bright and clear-cut, hard and silent, under 
the dawn of that last great day. . . . 

And strangest of all is it to hold my wife's 
hand again, and to think that I have counted 
her, and that she has counted me, among the 
dead. 

THE END.







Book: THE TIME MACHINE

The man who made the 
Time Machine  the man I 
shall call the Time Traveler 
 was well known in scientific circles 
a few years since, and the fact of his 
disappearance is also well known. 
He was a mathematician of peculiar 
subtlety, and one of our most conspicuous investigators in molecular 
physics. He did not confine himself 
to abstract science. Several ingenious, and one or two profitable, patents 
were his : very profitable they were, 
these last, as his handsome house at 
Richmond testified. To those who 



2 THE TIME MACHINE. 

were his intimates, however, his 
scientific investigations were as nothing to his gift of speech. In the 
after-dinner hours he was ever a 
vivid and variegated talker, and at 
times his fantastic, often paradoxical, 
conceptions came so thick and close 
as to form one continuous discourse. 
At these times he was as unlike the 
popular conception of a scientific investigator as a man could be. His 
cheeks would flush, his eyes grow 
bright ; and the stranger the ideas 
that sprang and crowded in his 
brain, the happier and the more 
animated would be his exposition. 
Up to the last there was held at 
his house a kind of informal gathering, which it was my privilege to attend, and where, at one time or 
another, I have met most of our distinguished literary and scientific men. 
There was a plain dinner at seven. 
After that we would adjourn to a 
room of easy-chairs and little tables, 
and there, with libations of alcohol 



THE INVENTOR. 3 

and reeking pipes, we would invoke 
the god. At first the conversation 
was mere fragmentary chatter, with 
some local lacunce of digestive 
silence ; but toward nine or half-past 
nine, if the god was favorable, some 
particular topic would triumph by a 
kind of natural selection, and would 
become the common interest. So it 
was, I remember, on the last Thursday but one of all the Thursday 
when I first heard of the Time 
Machine. 

I had been jammed in a corner 
with a gentleman who shall be disguised as Filby. He had been running down Milton  the public neglects poor Filby's little verses shockingly ; and as I could think of 
nothing but the relative status of 
Filby and the man he criticised, and 
was much too timid to discuss that, 
the arrival of that moment of fusion, 
when our several conversations were 
suddenly merged into a general discussion, was a great relief to me. 



4 THE TIME MACHINE. 

" What's that is nonsense ?" said a 
well-known Medical Man, speaking 
across Filby to the Psychologist. 

" He thinks," said the Psychologist, "that Time's only a kind of 
Space." 

" It's not thinking," said the Time 
Traveler ; "it's knowledge." 

"fFoppish affectation," said Filby, 
still harping upon his wrongs ; but 
I feigned a great interest in this 
question of Space and Time. 
' Kant "began the Psychologist. 
' Confound Kant ! " said the Time 
Traveler. " I tell you I'm right. 
I've got experimental proof of it. 
I'm not a metaphysician." He addressed the Medical Man across the 
room, and so brought the whole 
company into his own circle. " It's 
the most promising departure in experimental work that has ever been 
made. It will simply revolutionize 
life. Heaven knows what life will be 
when I've carried the thing through." 



THE INVENTOR. 5 

" As long as it's not the water of 
immortality I don't mind," said the 
distinguished Medical Man. " What 
is it?" 

" Only a paradox," said the Psychologist. 

The Time Traveler said nothing 
in reply, but smiled and began tapping his pipe upon the fender curb. 
This was the invariable presage of 
a dissertation. 

" You have to admit that time is a 
spatial dimension," said the Psychologist, emboldened by immunity and 
addressing the Medical Man, "and 
then all sorts of remarkable consequences are found inevitable. 
Among others, that it becomes possible to travel about in time." 

The Time Traveler chuckled. 
" You forget that I'm going to prove 
it experimentally." 
' Let's have your experiment," said 
the Psychologist. 

" I think we'd like the argument 
first," said Filby. 



6 THE TIME MACHINE. 

" It's this," said the Time Traveler. 
" You must follow me carefully. I 
shall have to controvert one or two 
ideas that are almost universally accepted. The geometry, for instance, 
they taught you at school is founded 
on a misconception." 

" Is not that rather a large thing 
to expect us to begin upon?" said 
Filby. 

" I do not mean to ask you to 
accept anything without reasonable 
ground for it. You will soon admit 
as much as I want from you. You 
know, of course, that a mathematical 
line, a line of thickness nil has no 
real existence. They taught you 
that ? Neither has a mathematical 
plane. These things are mere abstractions." 

"That is all right," said the 
Psychologist. 

 Nor, having only length, breadth, 
and thickness; can a cube have a real 
existence." 

"There I object," said Filby. 



THE INVENTOR. 7 

" Of course a solid body may exist. 
All real things " 
 So most people think. But wait 
a moment. Can an instantaneous 
cube exist ? " 

" Don't follow you," said Filby. 

" Can a cube that does not last 
for any time at all, have a real 
existence ? " 

Filby became pensive. 

"Clearly," the Philosophical Inventor proceeded, "any real body 
must have extension in four directions : it must have Length, Breadth, 
Thickness, and  Duration. But 
through a natural infirmity of the 
flesh, which I will explain to you in 
a moment, we incline to overlook 
the fact. There are really four 
dimensions, three which we call the 
three planes of Space, and a fourth, 
Time. There is, however, a tendency to draw an unreal distinction 
between the former three dimensions and the latter, because it happens that our consciousness moves 



8 THE TIME MACHINE. 

intermittently in one direction along 
the latter from the beginning to the 
end of our lives." 

" That," said a Very Young Man, 
making spasmodic efforts to relight 
his cigar over the lamp : " that  
very clear indeed." 

" Now, it is very remarkable that 
this is so extensively overlooked," 
continued the Philosophical Inventor, with a slight accession of cheerfulness. "Really this is what is 
meant by the Fourth Dimension, 
though some people who talk about 
the Fourth Dimension do not know 
they mean it. It is only another 
way of looking at Time. There is 
no differ e7ice betiveen Time and any of 
the three dimensions of Space except 
that our consciousness moves along it. 
But some foolish people have got 
hold of the wrong side of that idea. 
You have all heard what they have to 
say about this Fourth Dimension ? " 

"I have not," said the Provincial 
Mayor. 



THE INVENTOR. Q 

"It is simply this, That space, as 
our mathematicians have it, is spoken 
of as having three dimensions, which 
one may call Length, Breadth, and 
Thickness, and is always definable 
by reference to these planes, each at 
right angle to the others. But some 
philosophical people have been asking why three dimensions particularly 
 why not another direction at right 
angles to the other three ?  and have 
even tried to construct a Four-Dimensional geometry. Professor Simon 
Newcomb was expounding this to 
the New York Mathematical Society 
only a month or so ago. You know 
how on a flat surface, which has only 
two dimensions, we can represent a 
figure of a Three-Dimensional solid, 
and similarly they think that by 
models of three dimensions they 
could represent one of four  if they 
could master the perspective of the 
thing. See?" 

" I think so," murmured the Provincial Mayor ; and, knitting his 



10 THE TIME MACHINE. 

brows, he lapsed into an introspective 
state, his lips moving as one who repeats mystic words. Yes, I think 
I see it now," he said after some 
time, brightening in a quite transitory manner. 

"" Well, I do not mind telling you I 
have been at work upon this geometry of Four Dimensions for some 
time. Some of my results are curious : for instance, here is a portrait 
of a man at eight years old, another 
at fifteen, another at seventeen, another at twenty-three, and so on. All 
these are evidently sections, as it 
were, Three-Dimensional representations of his Four-Dimensional being, 
which is a fixed and unalterable 
thing. 

" Scientific people," proceeded the 
Philosopher, after the pause requiicd 
for the proper assimilation of this, ' know very well that Time is only 
a kind of Space. Here is a popular 
scientific diagram, a weather record. 
This line I trace with my finger shows 



THE INVENTOR. 1 1 

the movement of the barometer. 
Yesterday it was so high, yesterday 
night it fell, then this morning it rose 
again, and so gently upward to here. 
Surely the mercury did not trace this 
line in any of the dimensions of space 
generally recognized ? But certainly 
it traced such a line, and that line, 
therefore, we must conclude, was 
along the Time Dimension." 

" But," said the Medical Man, 
staring hard at a coal in the fire, " if 
Time is really only a fourth dimension of Space, why is it, and why has 
it always been, regarded as something 
different ? And why cannot we move 
about in Time as we move about in 
the other dimensions of Space ? " 

The Philosophical Person smiled. 
" Are you so sure we can move freely 
in Space? Right and left we can 
go, backward and forward freely 
enough, and men always have done 
so. I admit we move freely in two 
dimensions. But now about up and 
down ? Gravitation limits us there." 



12 THE TIME MACHINE.. 

" Not exactly," said the Medical 
Man. " There are balloons." 

" But before the balloons, save for 
spasmodic jumping and the inequalities of the surface, man had no freedom of vertical movement." 

" Still they could move a little up 
and down," said the Medical Man. 

" Easier, far easier, down than 
up." 
' And you cannot move at all in 
Time. You cannot get away from 
the present moment." 

" My dear sir, that is just where 
you are wrong. That is just where 
the whole world has gone wrong. 
We are always getting away from 
the present moment. Our mental 
existences, which are immaterial 
and have no dimensions, are passing 
along the Time Dimension with a 
uniform velocity from the cradle to 
the grave. Just as we should travel 
down if we began our existence fifty 
miles above the earth's surface." 

"But the great difficulty is this," 



THE INVENTOR. 13 

interrupted the Psychologist : "You 
can move about in all directions of 
Space, but you cannot move about 
in Time." 

" That is the germ of my great discovery. But you are wrong to say 
that we cannot move about in Time. 
For instance, if I am recalling an incident very vividly I go back to the 
instant of its occurrence ; I become 
absent-minded, as you say. I jump 
back for a moment. Of course we 
have no means of staying back for any 
length of time any more than a savage or an animal has of staying six 
feet above the ground. But a civilized man is better off than the savage 
in this respect. He can go up against 
gravitation in a balloon, and why 
should we not hope that ultimately 
he may be able to stop or accelerate 
his drift along the Time Dimension ; 
or even to turn about and travel the 
other way ? " 

"Oh, this;' began Filby, "is 
all " 



14 THE TIME MACHINE. 

" Why not ? " said the Philosophical Inventor. 

" It's against reason," said Filby. 

"What reason?" said the Philosophical Inventor. 

" You can show black is white by 
argument," said Filby, "but you will 
never convince me." 

" Possibly not," said the Philosophical Inventor. " But now you begin 
to see the object of my investigations 
into the geometry of Four Dimensions. Long ago I had a vague inkling of a machine " 

" To travel through Time ! " said 
the Very Young Man. 

" That shall travel indifferently in 
any direction of Space and Time, as 
the driver determines." 

Filby contented himself with laughter. 

" It would be remarkably convenient," the Psychologist suggested. 
" One might travel back and witness 
the battle of Hastings." 

" Don't you think you would at


THE INVENTOR.5 

tract attention?" said the Medical 
Man.' Our ancestors had no great 
tolerance for anachronisms." 

" One might get one's Greek from 
the very lips of Homer and Plato," 
the Very Young Man thought. 

" In which case they would certainly plow you for the little-go. 
The German scholars have improved 
Greek so much." 

'' Then, there is the future," said 
the Very Young Man. " Just think ! 
One might invest all one's money, 
leave it to accumulate at interest, 
and hurry on ahead." 

"To discover a society," said I, 
" erected on a strictly communistic 

basis." 

" Of all the wild extravagant 
theories " began the Psychologist. 

" Yes, so it seemed to me, and so I 
never talked of it until " 

" Experimental verification ! " cried 
I. " You are going to verify that! " 

" The experiment ! " cried Filby, 
who was getting brain-weary. 



1 6 THE TIME MACHINE. 

" Let's see your experiment, anyhow," said the Psychologist, " though 
it's all humbug, you know." 

The Time Traveler smiled round 
at us. Then, still smiling faintly, 
and with his hands deep in his 
trousers pockets, he walked slowly 
out of the room, and we heard his 
slippers shuffling down the long passage to his laboratory. 

The Psychologist looked at us. 
 I wonder what he's got ? " 

"Some sleight-of-hand trick or 
other," said the Medical Man, and 
Filby tried to tell us about a conjuror 
he had seen at Burslem, but before he 
had finished his preface the Time 
Traveler came back, and Filby's 
anecdote collapsed. 

The thing the Time Traveler held 
in his hand was a glittering metallic 
framework, scarcely larger than a 
small clock, and very delicately made. 
There was ivory in it, and some 
transparent crystalline substance. 
And now I must be explicit, for 



THE INVENTOR. 17 

this that follows  unless his explanation is to be accepted  is an absolutely unaccountable thing. He took 
one of the small octagonal tables 
that were scattered about the room, 
and set it in front of the fire, with 
two legs on the hearthrug. On this 
table he placed the mechanism. 
Then he drew up a chair and sat 
down. The only other object on the 
table was a small shaded lamp, the 
bright light of which fell full upon 
the model. There were also perhaps 
a dozen candles about, two in brass 
candlesticks upon the mantel and 
several in sconces, so that the room 
was brilliantly illuminated. I sat in 
a low armchair nearest the fire, and I 
drew this forward so as to be almost 
between the Time Traveler and the 
fireplace. Filby sat behind him, 
looking over his shoulder. The 
Medical Man and the Rector 
watched him in profile from the 
right, the Psychologist from the left. 
We were all on the alert. It ap


l8 THE TIME MACHINE. 

pears incredible to me that any kind 
of trick, however subtly conceived 
and however adroitly done, could 
have been played upon us under 
these conditions. 

The Time Traveler looked at us 
and then at the mechanism. 

" Well ? " said the Psychologist. 

" This little affair," said the Time 
Traveler, resting his elbows upon the 
table and pressing his hands together 
above the apparatus,  is only a 
model. It is my plan for a machine 
to travel through Time. You will 
notice that it looks singularly askew, 
and that there is an odd twinkling 
appearance about this bar, as though 
it was in some way unreal." He 
pointed to the part with his finger. 
" Also, here is one little white lever, 
and here is another." 

The Medical Man got up out of 
his chair and peered into the thing. 
"It's beautifully made," he said. 

" It took two years to make," retorted the Time Traveler. Then, 



THE INVENTOR. IQ 

when we had all done as the Medical 
Man, he said : " Now I want you 
clearly to understand that this lever, 
being pressed over, sends the machine 
gliding into the future, and this other 
reverses the motion. This saddle 
represents the seat of a time traveler. 
Presently I am going to press the 
lever, and off the machine will go. 
It will vanish, pass into future time, 
and disappear. Have a good look at 
the thing. Look at the table too, 
and satisfy yourselves there is no 
trickery. I don't want to waste this 
model, and then be told I'm a 
quack." 

There was a minute's pause 
perhaps. The Psychologist seemed 
about to speak to me, but changed 
his mind. Then the Time Traveler 
put forth his finger toward the lever. ' No," he said suddenly ; " lend 
me your hand." And turning to the 
Psychologist, he took that individual's 
hand in his own and told him to put 
out his forefinger. So that it was 



20 THE TIME MACHINE. 

the Psychologist himself who sent 
forth the model Time Machine on 
its interminable voyage. We all saw 
the lever turn. I am absolutely certain there was no trickery. There 
was a breath of wind, and the lamp 
flame jumped. One of the candles 
on the mantel was blown out, and 
the little machine suddenly swung 
round, became indistinct, was seen as 
a ghost for a second perhaps, as an 
eddy of faintly glittering brass and 
ivory ; and it was gone  vanished ! 
Save for the lamp the table was bare. 

Everyone was silent for a minute. 
Then Filby said he was d d. 

The Psychologist recovered from 
his stupor, and suddenly looked 
under the table. At that the 
Time Traveler laughed cheerfully. 
" Well ? " he said, with a reminiscence of the Psychologist. Then, 
getting up, he went to the tobacco 
jar on the mantel, and with his back 
to us began to fill his pipe. 

AVe stared at each other. 



THE INVENTOR. 21 

"Look here," said the Medical 
Man, are you in earnest about this ? 
Do you seriously believe that that 
machine has traveled into Time ? " 

 Certainly," said the Time Traveler, stooping to light a spill at the 
fire. Then he turned, lighting his 
pipe, to look at the Psychologist's 
face. (The Psychologist, to show 
that he was not unhinged, helped 
himself to a cigar and tried to light 
it uncut.)' What is more, I have a 
big machine nearly finished in there," 
 he indicated the laboratory,  " and 
when that is put together I mean to 
have a journey on my own account." 
 You mean to say that that machine has traveled into the future ?" 
said Filby. 

" Into the future or the past  I 
don't, for certain, know which." 

After an interval the Psychologist 
had an inspiration. 

" It must have gone into the past 
if it has gone anywhere," he said. 

" Why ? " said the Time Traveler. 



22 THE TIME MACHINE. 

" Because I presume that it has 
not moved in space, and if it traveled 
into the future it would still be here 
all this time, since it must have 
traveled through this time." 

" But," said I, '' if it traveled into 
the past it would have been visible 
when we came first into this room ; 
and last Thursday when we were 
here ; and the Thursday before that ; 
and so forth ! " 

" Serious objections," remarked 
the Rector with an air of impartiality, 
turning toward the Time Traveler. 

" Not a bit," said the Time 
Traveler, and, to the Psychologist :  You think. You can explain that. 
It's presentation below the threshold, 
you know, diluted presentation." 

" Of course," said the Psychologist, 
and reassured us.  That's a simple 
point in psychology. I should have 
thought of it. It's plain enough, and 
helps the paradox delightfully. We 
cannot see it, nor can we appreciate 
this machine, any more than we can 



THE INVENTOR, 23 

the spoke of a wheel spinning, or a 
bullet flying through the air. If it is 
traveling through time fifty times or 
a hundred times faster than we are, 
if it gets through a minute while we 
get through a second, the impression 
it creates will of course be only onefiftieth or one-hundredth of what it 
would make if it were not traveling 
in time. That's plain enough." He 
passed his hand through the space in 
which the machine had been. " You 
see ? " he said laughing. 

We sat and stared at the vacant 
table for a minute or so. Then the 
Time Traveler asked us what we 
thought of it all. 

" It sounds plausible enough tonight," said the Medical Man ; "but 
wait until to-morrow. Wait for the 
common sense of the morning." 
' Would you like to see the Time 
Machine itself ? " asked the Time 
Traveler. And therewith, taking the 
lamp in his hand, he led the way 
down the long, draughty corridor to 



24 THE TIME MACHINE. 

his laboratory. I remember vividly 
the flickering light, his queer, broad 
head in silhouette, the dance of the 
shadows, how we all followed him, 
puzzled but incredulous, and how 
there in the laboratory we beheld a 
larger edition of the little mechanism 
which we had seen vanish from before our eyes. Parts were of nickel, 
parts of ivory, parts had certainly 
been filed or sawn out of rock crystal. 
The thing was generally complete, 
but the twisted crystalline bars lay 
unfinished upon the bench beside 
some sheets of drawings, and I took 
one up for a better look at it. 
Quartz it seemed to be. 

" Look here," said the Medical 
Man, "are you perfectly serious? 
Or is this a trick  like that ghost 
you showed us last Christmas ? " 

" Upon that machine," said the 
Time Traveler, holding the lamp 
aloft, " I intend to explore Time. Is 
that plain ? I was never more serious 
in my life." 




CHAPTER II. 
XLhc tlime traveler IReturn 

THINK that at that time 
none of us quite believed 

in the Time Machine. 

The fact is, the Time Traveler was 
one of those men who are too 
clever to be believed ; you never 
felt that you saw all round him ; you 
always suspected some subtle reserve, some ingenuity in ambush, behind his lucid frankness. Had Filby 
shown the model and explained the 
matter in the Time Traveler's words, 
we should have shown Mm far less 
skepticism. The point is, we should 
have seen his motives  a porkbutcher could understand Filby. 
But the Time Traveler had more 
than a touch of whim among his 
elements, and we distrusted him. 
Things that would have made the 
fame of a clever man seemed tricks 

25 



26 THE TIME MACHINE, 

in his hands. It is a mistake to do 
things too easily. The serious people who took him seriously never felt 
quite sure of his deportment ; they 
were somehow aware that trusting 
their reputations for judgment with 
him was like furnishing a nursery 
with eggshell china. So I don't 
think any of us said very much about 
time traveling in the interval between 
that Thursday and the next, though 
its odd potentialities ran, no doubt, 
in most of our minds : its plausibility, 
that is, its practical incredibleness, 
the curious possibilities of anachronism and of utter confusion it suggested. For my own part, I was 
particularly preoccupied with the 
trick of the model. That I remember discussing with the Medical Man, 
whom I met on Friday at the Linnsean. He said he had seen a similar 
thing at Tubingen, and laid considerable stress on the blowing-out of the 
candle. But how the trick was done 
he could not explain. 



THE TIME TRAVELER RETURNS. 27 

The next Thursday I went again 
to Richmond  I suppose I was one 
of the Time Traveler's most constant 
guests  and, arriving late, found four 
or five men already assembled in his 
drawing room. The Medical Man 
was standing before the fire with a 
sheet of paper in one hand and his 
watch in the other. I looked round 
for the Time Traveler, and  
" It's half-past seven now," said 
the Medical Man. " I suppose we'd 
better have dinner ? " 
 Where's ?" said I, naming 

our host. 

"You've just come? It's rather 
odd. He's unavoidably detained. 
He asks me in his note to lead off 
with dinner at seven if he's not back. 
Says he'll explain when he comes." 

" It's seems a pity to let the dinner 
spoil," said the Editor of a wellknown daily paper ; and thereupon 
the Doctor rang the bell. 

The Psychologist was the only person besides the Doctor and myself 



28 THE TIME MACHINE. 

who had attended the previous dinner. The other men were Blank, the 
Editor afore-mentioned, a certain 
journalist, and another  a quiet, shy 
man with a beard  whom I didn't 
know, and who, as far as my observation went, never opened his mouth 
all the evening. There was some 
speculation at the dinner-table about 
the Time Traveler's absence, and I 
suggested time traveling, in a halfjocular spirit. The Editor wanted 
that explained to him, and the Psychologist volunteered a wooden account of the " ingenious paradox and 
trick " we had witnessed that day 
week. He was in the midst of his 
exposition when the door from the 
corridor opened slowly and without 
noise. I was facing the door, and 
saw it first. 

"Hallo!" I said. "At last!" 
And the door opened wider, and 
the Time Traveler stood before us. 
I gave a cry of surprise. 

" Good Heavens, man ! what's the 



THE TIME TRAVELER RETURNS. 29 

matter ? " cried the Medical Man, 
who saw him next. And the whole 
tableful turned toward the door. 

He was in an amazing pHght. His 
coat was dusty and dirty, and smeared 
with green down the sleeves ; his 
hair disordered, and as it seemed to 
me grayer  either with dust and dirt 
or because its color had actually 
faded. His face was ghastly pale ; 
his chin had a brown cut on it a 
cut half-healed ; his expression was 
haggard and drawn, as by intense 
suffering. For a moment he liesitated 
in the doorway, as if he had been 
dazzled by the light. Then he came 
into the room. He walked with just 
such a limp as I have seen in footsore tramps. We stared at him in 
silence, expecting him to speak. 

He said not a word, but came painfully to the table, and made a motion 
toward the wine. The Editor filled 
a glass of champagne and pushed it 
toward him. He drained it, and it 
seemed to do him good ; for he looked 



30 THE TIME MACHINE. 

round the table, and the ghost of his 
old smile flickered across his face. 

" What on earth have you been up 
to, man ? " said the Doctor. 

The Time Traveler did not seem to 
hear. " Don't let me disturb you," he 
said, with a certain faltering articulation. " I'm all right." He stopped, 
held out his glass for more, and took it 
off at a draught. " That's good," he 
said. His eyes grew brighter, and a 
faint color came into his cheeks. His 
glance flickered over our faces with 
a certain dull approval, and then went 
round the warm and comfortable 
room. Then he spoke again, still as 
it were feeling his way among his 
words.' I'm going to wash and 
dress, and then I'll come down and 
explain things. Save me some of 
that mutton. I'm starving for a bit 
of meat." 

He looked across at the Editor, 
who was a rare visitor, and hoped he 
was all right. The Editor began a 
question. 



THE TIME TRAVELER RETURNS. 31 
 Tell you presently," said the Time 
Traveler. ''I'm  funny! Be all 
right in a minute." 

He put down his glass, and walked 
toward the staircase door. Again I 
remarked his lameness and the soft 
padding sound of his footfall, and 
standing up in my place I saw his 
feet as he went out. He had nothing 
on them but a pair of tattered, bloodstained socks. Then the door closed 
upon him. I had half a mind to follow, till I remembered how he detested any fuss about himself. For a 
minute, perhaps, my mind was wool 
gathering. Then, " Remarkable Behavior of an Eminent Scientist," I 
heard the Editor say, thinking (after 
his wont) in headlines. And this 
brought my attention back to the 
bright dinner table. 

" What's the game ? " said the 
Journalist. " Has he been doing the 
Amateur Cadger ? I don't follow." 

I met the eye of the Psychologist, 
and read my own interpretation in 



32 THE TIME MACHINE. 

his face. I thought of the Time 
Traveler limping painfully upstairs. 
I don't think anyone else had noticed 
his lameness. 

The first to recover completely 
from this surprise was the Medical 
Man, who rang the bell  the Time 
Traveler hated to have servants waiting at dinner  for a hot plate. At 
that the Editor turned to his knife 
and fork with a grunt, and the Silent 
Man followed suit. The dinner was 
resumed. Conversation was exclamatory for a little while, with gaps of 
wonderment ; and then the Editor 
got fervent in his curiosity. 

" Does our friend eke out his modest income with a crossing, or has he 
his Nebuchadnezzar phases ? " he 
inquired. 

" I feel assured it's this business of 
the Time Machine," I said, and took 
up the Psychologist's account of our 
previous meeting. 

The new guests were frankly incredulous. The Editor raised objections. 



THE TIME TRAVELER RETURNS. 33 

" What was this time traveling ? 
A man couldn'tcover himself with dust 
by rolling in a paradox, could he?" 

And then, as the idea came home to 
him, he resorted to caricature. Hadn't 
they any clothes-brushes in the Future? 
The Journalist, too, would not believe at any price, and joined the 
Editor in the easy work of heaping 
ridicule on the whole thing. They 
were both the new kind of Journalist 
 very joyous, irreverent young men. 
" Our Special Correspondent in the 
Day After To-Morrow reports," the 
Journalist was saying  or rather 
shouting  when the Time Traveler 
came back. He was dressed in ordinary evening clothes, and nothing 
save his haggard look remained of 
the change that had startled me. 

"I say," said the Editor hilariously, 
" these chaps here say you have 
been traveling into the middle of 
next week ! Tell us all about little 
Rosebery, will you ? What will you 
take for the lot ? " 



34 THE TIME MACHINE. 

The Time Traveler came to the 
place reserved for him without a 
word. He smiled quietly, in his old 
way. 

" Where's ray mutton ? " he said. 
 What a treat it is to stick a fork 
into meat again ! " 
' Story !" cried the Editor. 

''Story be d d !" said the Time 

Traveler. " I want something to eat. 
I won't say a word until I get some 
peptone into my arteries. Thanks .' 
And the salt." 

"One word," said I.' Have you 
been time traveling ?" 

" Yes," said the Time Traveler, 
with his mouth full, nodding his head. 

" I'd give a shilling a line for a 
verbatim note," said the Editor. The 
Time Traveler pushed his glass 
toward the Silent Man and rang it 
with his finger nail ; at which the 
Silent Man, who had been staring 
at his face, started convulsively, and 
poured him wine. The rest of the 
dinner was uncomfortable. For my 



THE TIME TRAVELER RETURNS. 35 

own part, sudden questions kept on 
rising to my lips, and I dare say it 
was the same with the others. The 
Journalist tried to relieve the tension 
by telling anecdotes of Hettie Potter. 
The Time Traveler devoted his attention to his dinner, and displayed 
the appetite of a tramp. The Medical Man smoked a cigarette, and 
watched the Time Traveler through 
his eyelashes. The Silent Man 
seemed even more clumsy than usual, 
and drank champagne with regularity 
and determination out of sheer nervousness. At last the Time Traveler 
pushed his plate away, and looked 
round us. 

"I suppose I must apologize," 
he said. " I was simply starving. 
I've had a most amazing time." He 
reached out his hand for a cigar, 
and cut the end. " But come into 
the smoking room. It's too long a 
story to tell over greasy plates." And 
ringing the bell in passing, he led the 
way into the adjoining room. 



36 THE TIME MACHINE. 

" You have told Blank and Dash 
and Chose about the machine?" he 
said to me, leaning back in his easychair and naming the three newguests. 

" But the thing's a mere paradox," 
said the Editor. 
' I can't argue to-night. I don't 
mind telling you the story, but I can't 
argue. I will," he went on,' tell 
you the story of what has happened 
to me, if you like, but you must refrain from interruptions. I want to 
tell it. Badly. Most of it will 
sound like lying. So be it ! It's 
true every word of it, all the same. 
I was in my laboratory at four 

o'clock, and since then I've 

lived eight days  such days as no 
human being ever lived before ! 
I'm nearly worn out, but I shan't 
sleep till I've told this thing over to 
you. Then I shall go to bed. But 
no interruptions ! Is it agreed ? " 

" Agreed !" said the Editor, and 
the rest of us echoed " Agreed ! " 



THE TIME TRAVELER RETURNS. 37 

And with that the Time Traveler 
began his story as I have set it forth. 
He sat back in his chair at first, and 
spoke like a weary man. Afterward 
he got more animated. In writing it 
down I feel with only too much keenness the inadequacy of pen and ink  
and, above all, my own inadequacy  
to express its quality. You read, I 
will suppose, attentively enough ; but 
you cannot see the speaker's white, 
sincere face in the bright circle of the 
little lamp, nor hear the intonation 
of his voice. You cannot know how 
his expression followed the turns of 
his story ! Most of us hearers were 
in shadow, for the candles in the 
smoking room had not been lighted, 
and only the face of the Journalist 
and the legs of the Silent Man from 
the knees downward were illuminated. At first we glanced now and 
again at each other. After a time we 
ceased to do that, and looked only 
at the Time Traveler's face. 




CHAPTER III. 

TOLD some of you last 
Thursday of the principles 
of the Time Machine, and 
showed you the actual thing itself, 
incomplete, in the workshop. There 
it is now, a little travel-worn, truly ; 
and one of the ivory bars is cracked, 
and a brass rail bent ; but the rest of 
it is sound enough. I expected to 
finish it on Friday ; but on Friday, 
when the putting together was nearly 
done, I found that one of the nickel 
bars was exactly one inch too short, 
and this I had to get re-made ; so 
that the thing was not complete until 
this morning. It was at ten o'clock 
to-day that the first of all Time Machines began its career. I gave it 
a last tap, tried all the screws again, 
38 



THE STORY BEGINS. 39 

put one more drop of oil on the 
quartz rod, and sat myself in the 
saddle. I suppose a suicide who 
holds a pistol to his skull feels much 
the same wonder at what will come 
next as I felt then. I took the starting lever in one hand and the stopping one in the other, pressed the 
first, and almost immediately the 
second. I seemed to reel ; I felt a 
nightmare sensation of falling ; and, 
looking round, I saw the laboratory 
exactly as before. Had anything 
happened ? For a moment I suspected that my intellect had tricked 
me. Then I noted the clock. A 
moment before, as it seemed, it had 
stood at a minute or so past ten ; 
now it was nearly half-past three ! 
 I drew a breath, set my teeth, 
gripped the starting lever with both 
my hands, and went off with a thud. 
The laboratory got hazy and went 
dark. Mrs. Watchett came in, and 
walked, apparently without seeing 
me, toward the garden door. I sup


40 THE TIME MACHINE. 

pose it took her a minute or so to 
traverse the place, but to me she 
seemed to shoot across the room Uke 
a rocket. I pressed the lever over 
to its extreme position. The night 
came like the turning out of a lamp, 
and in another moment came tomorrow. The laboratory grew faint 
and hazy, then fainter and ever 
fainter. To-morrow night came 
black, then day again, night again, 
day again, faster and faster still. An 
eddying murmur filled my ears and 
a strange, dumb confusedness descended on my mind. 

" I am afraid I cannot convey the 
peculiar sensations of time-traveling. 
They are excessively unpleasant. 
There is a feeling exactly like that 
one has upon a switchback  of a 
helpless headlong motion ! I felt the 
same horrible anticipation, too, of 
an imminent smash. [As I put on 
pace, day followed night, like the 
flap, flap, flap of some rotating body. 
The dim suggestion of the laboratory 



THE STORY BEGINS. 41 

seemed presently to fall away from 
me, and I saw the sun hopping swiftly 
across the sky, leaping it every 
minute, and every minute marking a 
day. I supposed the laboratory had 
been destroyed, and I had come into 
the open air. | I had a dim impression 
of scaffolding, but I was already going too fast to be conscious of any 
moving things. The slowest snail 
that ever crawled dashed by too fast 
for me. The twinkling succession of 
darkness and light was excessively 
painful to the eye. Then in the 
intermittent darkness, I saw the 
moon spinning swiftly through her 
quarters from new to full, and had a 
faint glimpse of the circling stars. 
Presently, as I went on, still gaining 
velocity, the palpitation of night and 
day merged into one continuous 
grayness ; the sky took on a wonderful deepness of blue, a splendid luminous color like that of early twilight ; 
the jerking sun became a streak of 
fire, a brilliant arch in space, the 



42 THE TIME MACHINE. 

moon a fainter fluctuating band ; and 
I could see nothing of the stars, save 
now and then a brighter circle flickering in the blue. 

\'The landscape was misty and 
vague. I was still on the hillside 
upon which this house now stands, 
and the shoulder rose above me gray 
and dim. I saw trees growing and 
changing like puffs of vapor, now 
brown, now green ; they grew, 
spread, fluctuated, and passed away. 
I saw huge buildings rise up faint 
and fair, and pass like dreams. The 
whole surface of the earth seemed 
changing  melting and flowing under 
my eyes. \ The little hands upon the 
dials that registered my speed raced 
round faster and faster. Presently I 
noted that the sun belt swayed up and 
down, from solstice to solstice, in a 
minute or less, and that, consequently, my pace was over a year 
a minute ; and minute by minute 
the white snow flashed across the 
world and vanished, and was fol


THE STORY BEGINS. 43 

lowed by the bright, brief green of 
spring. 
' The unpleasant sensations of the 
start were less poignant now. They 
merged at last into a kind of hysterical exhilaration. I remarked, indeed, a clumsy swaying of the 
machine, for which I was unable to 
account. But my mind was too 
confused to attend to it, so with a 
kind of madness growing upon me 
I flung myself into futurity. At first 
I scarce thought of stopping, scarce 
thought of anything but these new 
sensations. But presently a fresh 
series of impressions grew up in my 
mind,  a certain curiosity, and therewith a certain dread,  until they at 
last took complete possession of me. 
What strange developments of humanity, what wonderful advances 
upon our rudimentary civilization, I 
thought, might not appear when I 
came to look nearly into the dim, 
elusive world that raced and fluctuated before my eyes ! I saw great 



44 THE TIME MACHINE. 

and splendid architectures rising 
about me, more massive than any 
buildings of our own time, and yet, 
as it seemed, built of glimmer and 
mist. I saw a richer green flow up 
the hillside, and remain there without any wintry intermission. Even 
through the veil of my confusion the 
earth seemed very fair. And so my 
mind came round to the business of 
stopping. 
' The peculiar risk lay in the possibility of my finding some substance 
in the space which I, or the machine, 
occupied. So long as I traveled at 
a high velocity through time, this 
scarcely mattered : I was, so to 
speak, attenuated  was slipping like 
a vapor through the interstices of 
intervening substances ! But to 
come to a stop involved the jamming 
of myself, molecule by molecule, into 
whatever lay in my way, meant 
bringing my atoms into such intimate contact with those of the 
obstacle that a profound chemical 



THE STORY BEGINS. 45 

reaction  possibly a far-reaching 
explosion  would result, and blow 
myself and my apparatus out of the 
Rigid Universe  out of all possible 
dimensions  into the Unknown. This 
possibility had occurred to me again 
and again while I was making the 
machine ; but then I had cheerfully 
accepted it as an unavoidable riskone of the risks a man has got to 
take ! Now the risk was inevitable, 
I no longer saw it in the same cheerful hght. The fact is that, insensibly, the absolute strangeness of 
everything, the sickly jarring and 
swaying of the machine, above all 
the feeling of prolonged falling, had 
absolutely upset my nerve. I told 
myself that I could never stop, and 
with a gust of petulance I resolved 
to stop forthwith. Like an impatient 
fool, I lugged over the lever, and 
incontinently the thing went reeling 
over, and I was flung headlong 
through the air 

" There was the sound of a clap 



46 THE TIME MACHINE. 

of thunder in my ears. I may have 
been stunned for a moment. A pitiless hail was hissing round me, and 
I was sitting on soft turf in front 
of the overset machine. Everything 
still seemed gray, but presently I 
remarked that the confusion in my 
ears was gone. I looked round me. 
I was on what seemed to be a little 
lawn in a garden, surrounded by 
rhododendron bushes, and I noticed 
that their mauve and purple blossoms were dropping in a shower under the beating of the hailstones. 
The rebounding, dancing hail hung 
in a little cloud over the machine, 
and drove along the ground like 
smoke. In a moment I was wet to 
the skin. ' Fine hospitality,' said I,  to a man who has traveled innumerable years to see you ! ' 

" Presently I thought what a fool 
I was to get wet. I stood up and 
looked round me. A colossal figure, 
carved apparently in some white 
stone, loomed indistinctly beyond 



THE STORY BEGINS. 47 

the rhododendrons through the hazydownpour. But all else of the world 
was invisible. 

" My sensations would be hard to 
describe. As the columns of hail 
grew thinner, I saw the white figure more distinctly. It was very 
large, for a silver birch tree touched 
its shoulder. It was of white marble, 
in shape something like a winged 
sphinx, but the wings, instead of 
being carried vertically at the sides, 
were spread so that it seemed to 
hover. The pedestal, it appeared to 
me, was of bronze, and was thick 
with verdigris. It chanced that the 
face was toward me ; the sightless 
eyes seemed to watch me ; there was 
the faint shadow of a smile on the 
lips. It was greatly weatherworn, 
and that imparted an unpleasant suggestion of disease. I stood looking 
at it for a little space  half a minute, 
perhaps, or half an hour. It seemed 
to advance and to recede as the hail 
drove before it denser or thinner. 



48 THE TIME MACHINE. 

At last I tore my eyes from it for a 
moment, and saw that the hail curtain had worn threadbare, and that 
the sky was lightening with the promise of the sun. 

" I looked up again at the crouching vhite shape, and the full temerity of my voyage came suddenly 
upon me. What might appear when 
that hazy curtain was altogether 
withdrawn ? What might not have 
happened to men ? What if cruelty 
had grown into a common passion ? 
What if in this interval the race had 
lost its manliness, and had developed 
into something inhuman, unsympathetic, and overwhelmingly powerful ? 
I might seem some old-world savage 
animal, only the more dreadful and 
disgusting for our common likeness  
a foul creature to be incontinently 
slain. 

" Already I saw other vast shapes 
 huge buildings with intricate parapets and tall columns, with a wooded 
hillside dimly creeping in upon me 



THE STORY BEGINS. 49 

through the lessening storm. I was 
seized with a panic fear. I turned 
frantically to the Time Machine, and 
strove hard to readjust it. As I did 
so the shafts of the sun smote through 
the thunderstorm. The gray downpour was swept aside and vanished 
like the trailing garments of a ghost. 
Above me, in the intense blue of 
the summer sky, some faint brown 
shreds of clouds whirled into nothingness. The great buildings about 
me stood out clear and distinct, shining with the wet of the thunderstorm, 
and picked out in white by the unmelted hailstones piled along their 
courses. I felt naked in a strange 
world. I felt as perhaps a bird may 
feel in the clear air, knowing the 
hawk wings above and will swoop. My 
fear grew to frenzy. I took a breathing space, set my teeth, and again 
grappled fiercely, wrist and knee, with 
the machine. It gave under my desperate onset and turned over. It 
struck my chin violently. One hand 



50 THE TIME MACHINE. 

on the saddle, the other on the lever, 
I stood panting heavily in attitude to 
mount again. 

"But with fhis recovery of a 
prompt retreat my courage recovered. 
I looked more curiously and less fearfully at this world of the remote 
future. In a circular opening, high 
up in the wall of the nearer house, I 
saw a group of figures clad in rich 
soft robes. They had seen me, and 
their faces were directed toward me. 

" Then I heard voices approaching 
me. Coming through the bushes by 
the white sphinx were the heads and 
shoulders of men running. One of 
these emerged in a pathway leading 
straight to the little lawn upon which 
I stood with my machine. He was 
a slight creature  perhaps four feet 
high  clad in a purple tunic, girdled 
at the waist with a leather belt. Sandals or buskins  I could not clearly 
distinguish which  whereon his feet ; 
his legs were bare to the knees, and 
his head was bare. Noticing that, I 



THE STORY BEGINS. 5 

noticed for the first time how warm 
the air was. 

" He struck me as being a very 
beautiful and graceful creature, but 
indescribably frail. His flushed face 
reminded me of the more beautiful 
kind of consumptive that hectic 
beauty of which we used to hear so 
much. At the sight of him I suddenly regained confidence. I took 
my hands from the machine. 




CHAPTER IV. 

be (5olDen Bae. 

N another moment we were 
standing face to face, I and 
this fragile thing out of 
futurity. He came straight up to 
me and laughed into my eyes. The 
absence of any signof fear from his 
bearing struck me at once. Then 
he turned to the two others who 
were following him and spoke to 
them in a strange and very sweet 
and liquid tongue. 

"There were others coming, and 
presently a little group of perhaps 
eight or ten of these exquisite creatures were about me. One of them 
addressed me. It came into my 
head, oddly enough, that my voice 
was too harsh and deep for them. So 
I shook my head, and pointing to my 

52 



THE GOLDEN AGE. 53 

ears, shook it again. He came a step 
forward, hesitated, and then touched 
my hand. Then I felt other soft 
little tentacles upon my back and 
shoulders. They wanted to make 
sure I was real. There was nothing 
in this at all alarming. Indeed, 
there was something in these pretty 
little people that inspired confidence  a graceful gentleness, a certain 
childlike ease. And besides, they 
looked so frail that I could fancy myself flinging the whole dozen of them 
about like ninepins. But I made 
a sudden motion to warn them when 
I saw their little pink hands feeling 
at the Time Machine. Happily then, 
when it was not too late, I thought 
of a danger I had hitherto forgotten, 
and reaching over the bars of the 
machine I unscrewed the little levers 
that would set it in motion, and put 
these in my pocket. Then I turned 
again to see what I could do in the 
way of communication. 

"And then, looking more nearly 



54 THE TIME MACHINE. 

into their features, I saw some further 
peculiarities in their Dresden china 
type of prettiness. Their hair, which 
was uniformly curly, came to a sharp 
end at the neck and cheek ; there 
was not the faintest suggestion of 
it on the face, and their ears were 
singularly minute. The mouths 
were small, with bright red, rather 
thin lips, and the little chins ran to 
a point. The eyes were large and 
mild ; and  this may seem egotism 
on my part  I fancied even then that 
there was a certain lack of the interest I might have expected in them. 

" As they made no effort to communicate with me, but simply stood 
round me smiling and speaking in 
soft cooing notes to each other, I 
began the conversation. I pointed 
to the Time Machine and to myself. 
Then, hesitating for a moment how 
to express Time, I pointed to the 
sun. At once a quaintly pretty little 
figure in checkered purple and white, 
followed my gesture, and then aston


THE GOLDEN AGE. 5S 

ished me by imitating the sound of 
thunder. 

" For the moment I was staggered, 
though the import of his gesture 
was plain enough. The question 
had come into my mind abruptly : 
Were these creatures fools ? You may 
hardly understand how it took me. 
You see I had always anticipated 
Jthat the people of the year Eight 
Hundred Thousand odd would be 
incredibly in front of us in knowledge, art, everything. Then one of "v, 
them suddenly asked me a question 
that showed him to be on the intellectual level of one of our five-yearold children  asked me, in fact, if 
I had come from the sun in a thunderstorm ! It let loose the judgment 
I had suspended upon their clothes, 
their frail, light limbs, and fragile 
features. A flow of disappointment 
rushed across my mind. For a moment I felt that I had built the Time 
Machine in vain. 

"I nodded, pointed to the sun, 



\ 



56 THE TIME MACHINE. 

and gave them such a vivid rendering of a thunderclap as startled them. 
They all withdrew a pace or so and 
bowed. Then came one laughing 
toward me, carrying a chain of 
beautiful flowers, altogether new to 
me, and put it about my neck. The 
idea was received with melodious 
applause ; and presently they were 
all running to and fro for flowers, 
and laughingly flinging them upon 
me until I was almost smothered 
with blossom. You who have never 
seen the like can scarcely imagine 
what delicate and wonderful flowers 
countless years of culture had 
created. Then someone suggested 
that their plaything should be exhibited in the nearest building, and 
so I was led past the sphinx of white 
marble, which had seemed to watch 
me all the while with a smile at my 
astonishment, toward a vast gray 
edifice of fretted stone. As I went 
with them the memory of my confident anticipations of a profoundly 



THE GOLDEN AGE. 57 

grave and intellectual posterity came, 
with irresistible merriment, to my 
mind. 
 The building had a large entry 
and was altogether of colossal dimensions. I was naturally most occupied with the growing crowd of little 
people, and with the big open portals 
that yawned before me shadowy and 
mysterious. My general impression 
of the world I saw over their heads 
was of a tangled waste of beautiful 
bushes and flowers, a long neglected 
and yet weedless garden. I saw 
a number of tall spikes of strange 
white flowers, measuring a foot perhaps across the spread of the waxen 
petals. They grew scattered, as if 
wild, among the variegated shrubs, 
but, as I say, I did not examine them 
closely at this time. The Time 
Machine was left deserted on the 
turf among the rhododendrons. 

" The arch of the doorway was 
richly carved, but naturally I did 
not observe the carving very nar


58 THE TIME MACHINE. 

rowly, though I fancied I saw suggestions of old Phoenician decorations 
as I passed through, and it struck me 
that they were very badly broken and 
weather-worn. Several more brightly 
clad people met me in the doorway, 
and so we entered, I, dressed in dingy 
nineteenth century garments, looking 
grotesque enough, garlanded with 
flowers, and surrounded by an eddying mass of bright, soft-colored 
robes and shining white limbs, in 
a melodious whirl of laughter and 
laughing speech. 

" The big doorway opened into a 
proportionately great hall hung with 
brown. The roof was in shadow, and 
the windows, partially glazed with 
colored glass, and partially unglazed, 
admitted a tempered light. The 
floor was made up of huge blocks of 
some very hard white metal, not 
plates nor slabs  blocks, and it was 
so much worn, as I judged by the 
going to and fro of past generations, 
as to be deeply channeled along the 



THE GOLDEN AGE. 59 

more frequented ways. Transverse 
to the length were innumerable tables 
made of slabs of polished stone, 
raised, perhaps, a foot from the floor, 
and upon these were heaps of fruits. 
Some I recognized as a kind of hypertrophied raspberry and orange, but 
for the most part they were strange. 

" Between the tables were scattered 
a great number of cushions. Upon 
these my conductors seated themselves, signing for me to do likewise. 
With a pretty absence of ceremony 
they began to eat the fruit with their 
hands, flinging peel, and stalks, and so 
forth, into the round openings in the 
sides of the tables. I was not loth 
to follow their example, for I felt 
thirsty and hungry. As I did so I 
surveyed the hall at my leisure. 

" And perhaps the thing that struck 
me most was its dilapidated look. 
The stained-glass windows, which 
displayed only a geometrical pattern, were broken in many places, 
and the curtains that hung across the 



6o THE TIME MACHINE. 

lower end were thick with dust. 
And it caught my eye that the 
corner of the marble table near me 
was fractured. Nevertheless, the 
general effect was extremely rich and 
picturesque. There were, perhaps, a 
couple of hundred people dining in 
the hall, and most of them, seated as 
near to me as they could come, were 
watching me with interest, their little 
eyes shining over the fruit they were 
eating. All were clad in the same 
'Soft, and yet strong, silky material. 
 Fruit, by the bye, was all their 
diet. These people of the remote 
future were strict vegetarians, and 
while I was with them, in spite of 
some carnal cravings, I had to be 
frugivorous also. Indeed, I found 
afterward that horses, cattle, sheep, 
dogs, had followed the ichthyosaurus 
into extinction. But the fruits were 
very delightful ; one, in particular, 
that seemed to be in season all the 
time I was there,  a floury thing in 
a three-sided husk,  was especially 



THE GOLDEN AGE. 6l 

good, and I made it my staple. At 
first I was puzzled by all these 
strange fruits, and by the strange 
flowers I saw, but later I began to 
perceive their import. 

" However, I am telling you of my 
fruit dinner in the distant future now. 
So soon as my appetite was a little 
checked, I determined to make a 
resolute attempt to learn the speech 
of these new men of mine. Clearly 
that was the next thing to do. The 
fruits seemed a convenient thing to 
begin upon, and holding one of these 
up I began a series of interrogative 
sounds and gestures. I had some 
considerable difficulty in conveying 
my meaning. At first my efforts met 
with a stare of surprise or inextinguishable laughter, but presently a 
fair-haired little creature seemed to 
grasp my intention and repeated a 
name. They had to chatter and 
explain their business at great length 
to each other, and my first attempts 
to make their exquisite little sounds 



62 THE TIME MACHINE. 

of the language caused an immense 
amount of genuine, if uncivil amusement. However, I felt like a schoolmaster amid children, and persisted, and presently I had a score 
of noun substantives at least, at my 
command ; and then I got to demonstrative pronouns, and even the verb  to eat.' But it was slow work, and 
the little people soon tired and 
wanted to get away from my interrogations, so I determined, rather of 
necessity, to let them give their 
lessons in little doses when they felt 
inclined. And very little doses I 
found they were before long, for I 
never met people more indolent or 
more easily fatigued. 

u 




CHAPTER V. 
Qnmct 

QUEER thing I soon discovered about my little 
hosts, and that was their 
lack of interest. They would come 
to me with eager cries of astonishment, like children, but, like children, 
they would soon stop examining me, 
and wander away after some other 
toy. The dinner and my conversational beginnings ended, I noted for 
the first time that almost all those 
who had surrounded me at first were 
gone. It is odd, too, how speedily 
I came to disregard these little 
people. I went out through the 
portal into the sunlit world again as 
soon as my hunger was satisfied. I 
was continually meeting more of these 
men of the future, who would follow 
63 




64 THE TIME MACHINE. 

me a little distance, chatter and 
laugh about me, and, having smiled 
and gesticulated in a friendly way, 
leave me again to my own devises. 

" The calm of evening was upon 
the world as I emerged from the 
great hall, and the scene was lit by the 
warm glow of the setting sun. At first 
things were very confusing. Every 
thing was so entirely different from 
the world I had known  even the 
flowers. The big building I had left 
was situated on the slope of a broad 
river valley, but the Thames had 
shifted, perhaps a mile from its 
present position. I resolved to 
mount to the summit of a crest, possibly a mile and a half away, from 
which I could get a wider view of 
this our planet in the year 802,701, 
A. D. For that, I should explain, 
was the date the little dials of my 
machine recorded. 
 As 1 walked I was watchful of 
every impression that could possibly 
help to explain the condition of 



SUNSET. 65 

ruinous splendor in which I found 
the world  for ruinous it was. A 
little way up the hill, for instance, 
was a great heap of granite, bound 
together by masses of aluminum, a 
vast labyrinth of precipitous walls 
and crumbled heaps, amid which 
were thick heaps of very beautiful 
pagoda-like plants  nettles possibly, 
but wonderfully tinted with brown 
about the leaves, and incapable of 
stinging. It was evidently the derelict remains of some vast structure, 
built to what end I could not determine. It was here that I was destined, at a later date, to have a very 
strange experience  the first intimation of a still stranger discovery  
but of that I will speak in its proper 
place. 

" Looking round, with a sudden 
thought, from a terrace on which I had 
rested for a while, I realized that there 
were no small houses to be seen. 
Apparently the single house, and 
possibly even the household, had 



66 THE TIME MACHINE. 

vanished. Here and there among 
the greenery were palace-like buildings, but the house and the cottage, 
which form such characteristic features of our own English landscape, 
had disappeared. 

" Communism,' said I to myself. 

"And on the heels of that came 

another thought. I looked at the 

half dozen little figures that were \ 

following me. Then, in a flash, I J f 

perceived that all had the same form  ( 

of costume, the same soft hairless '' 

. . . \ 

visage, and the same girlish rotundity ' 

of limb. It may seem strange, perhaps, that I had not noticed this 
before. But everything was so 
strange. Now, I saw the fact plainly 
enough. In costume, and in all the 
differences of texture and bearing 
that now mark off the sex from each 
other, these people of the future were 
alike. And the children seemed to 
my eyes to be but the miniatures of 
their parents. I judged then that 
children of that time were extremely 



SUNSET. 67 

precocious, physically at least, and I 
found afterward abundant verification of my opinion. 

'' Seeing the ease and security in 
which these people were living, 1 felt 
that this close resemblance of the 
sexes was, after all, what one would 
expect ; for the strength of a man 
and the softness of a woman, the institution of the family, and the differentiation of occupations are mere 
militant necessities of an age of 
physical force. Where population is 
balanced and abundant, much childbearing becomes an evil rather than 
a blessing to the State ; where violence comes but rarely and offspring 
are secure, there is less necessity  . 
indeed there is, no .necessity of an 
efficient family, and the specialization J' 
-of the sexes with reference to their \ 
Qhildren's needs disappears. We see 
some beginnings of this even in our 
own time, and in this future age it was 
complete. This, I must remind you, 
was my speculation at the time. 



68 THE TIME MACHINE. 

Later, I was to appreciate how far it 
fell short of the reality. 

" While I was musing upon these 
things, my attention was attracted by 
a pretty little structure, like a well 
under a cupola. I thought in a transitory way of the oddness of wells 
still existing, and then resumed the 
thread of my speculations. There 
were no large buildings toward the 
top of the hill, and as my walking 
powers were evidently miraculous, I 
was presently left alone for the first 
time. With a strange sense of freedom and adventure I pushed up to 
the crest. 

" There I found a seat of some 
yellow metal that I did not recognize, 
corroded in places with a kind of 
pinkish rust and half smothered in 
soft moss, the arm rests cast and 
filed into the resemblance of griffins' 
heads. I sat down on it, and I surveyed the broad view of our old 
world under the sunset of that long 
day. It was as sweet and fair a view 



SUNSET. 69 

as I have ever seen. The sun had 
already gone below the horizon and 
the west was flaming gold, touched 
with some horizontal bars of purple 
and crimson. Below was the valley 
of the Thames, in which the river 
lay like a band of burnished steel. 
I have ready spoken of the great 
palaces dotted about among the 
variegated greenery, some in ruins 
and some still occupied. Here and 
there rose a white or silvery figure in 
the waste garden of the earth, here 
and there came the sh.iirp vertical 
line of some cupola or obelisk. 
There were no hedges, no signs of 
proprietary rights, no evidences of 
agriculture ; the whole earth had 
become a garden. 

" So watching, I began to put my 
interpretation upon the things I had 
seen, and as it shaped itself to me that 
evening, my interpretation was something in this way (afterward I found 
I had got only a half truth, or only 
a glimpse of one facet of the truth) : 



' 



70 THE TIME MACHINE. 

" It seemed to me that I had hap' pened upon" humanity upon the wane. 
The ruddy sunset set me thinking of 
the sunset of mankind. For the first 
time I began to realize an odd consequence of the social effort in which 
we are at present engaged. And yet, 
come to think, it is a logical consequence enough. Strength is the 
outcome of need ; security sets a 
premium on feebleness. The work 
of ameliorating the conditions of 
life  the true civilizing process that 
makes life more and more secure  
had gone steadily on to a climax. 
One triumph of a united humanity 
over Nature had followed another. 
Things that are now mere dreams 
had become projects deliberately put 
in hand and carried forward. And 
the harvest was what I saw ! 

" After all, the sanitation and the 
agriculture of to-day are still in the 
rudimentary stage. The science of 
our time has attacked but a little department of the field of human dis


SUNSET. 71 

ease, but, even so, it spreads its 
operations very steadily and persistently. Our agriculture and horticulture destroy just here and there a 
weed and cultivate perhaps a score 
or so of wholesome plants, leaving 
the greater number to fight out a 
balance as they can. We improve 
our favorite plants and animals  and 
how few they are  gradually by 
selective breeding ; now a new and 
better peach, now a seedless grape, 
now a sweeter and larger flower, now 
a more convenient breed of cattle. 
We improve them gradually, because 
our ideals are vague and tentative, 
and our knowledge is very limited ; 
because Nature, too, is shy and slow 
in our clumsy hands. Some day all 
this will be better organized, and still 
better. That is the drift of the current in spite of the eddies. The 
whole world will be intelligent, educated, and co-operating ; things will 
move faster and faster toward the 
subjugation of Nature. In the end, 



72 THE TIME MACHINE. 

wisely and carefully we shall readjust the balance of animal and vegetable life to suit our human needs. 

" This adjustment, I say, must have 
been done, and done well : done indeed for all time, in the space of 
Time across which my machine had 
leaped. The air was free from gnats, 
the earth from weeds or fungi ; everywhere were fruits and sweet and 
delightful flowers ; brilliant butterflies flew hither and thither. The 
ideal of preventive medicine was 
attained. Diseases had been stamped 
out. I saw no evidence of any contagious diseases during all my stay. 
And I shall have to tell you later that 
even the processes of putrefaction 
and decay had been profoundly 
affected by these changes. 

" Social triumphs, too, had been 
effected. I saw mankind housed in 
splendid shelters, gloriously clothed, 
and as yet I had found them engaged 
in no toil. There were no signs of 
struggle, neither social nor economi


SUNSET. 73 

cal struggle. The shop, the advertisement, traffic, all that commerce 
which constitutes the body of our 
world, was gone. It was natural on 
that golden evening that I should 
jump at the idea of a social paradiae. 

" The difficulty of increasing popu-| 
lation had been met, I guessed, anq| 
population had ceased to increase. '1 

'' But with this change in condition 
comes inevitably adaptations to the 
change. What, unless biological 
science is a mass of errors, is the 
cause of human intelligence and L 

vigor ? Hardship and freedom :  f 
conditions under which the active, v 
strong, and subtle survive and the ij. 

weaker go to the wall ; conditions 
that put a premium upon the loyal 
alliance of capable men, upon selfrestraint, patience, and decision. And 
the institution of the family, and the 
emotions that arise therein, the fierce 
jealousy, the tenderness for offspring, 
parental self-devotion, all found their 
justification and support in the immi


74 THE TIME MACHINE. 

nent dangers of the young. Now, 
where are those imminent dangers ? 
There is a sentiment arising, and it 
will grow, against connubial jealousy, 
against fierce maternity, against passion of all sorts ; unnecessary things 
now, and things that make us uncomfortable, savage survivals, discords in 
a refined and pleasant life. 

'' I thought of the physical slightness of the people, their lack of intelligence, and those big abundant 
ruins, and it strengthened my belief 
in a gpilect cquest of Nature. 
For after the battle comes Quiet. 
Humanity had been strong, energetic, 
and intelligent, and had used all its 
abundant vitality to alter the conditions under which it lived. And 
now came the -reaction of the altered 
conditions.' 

" Under the new conditions of perfect comfort and security, that restless energy, that with us is strength, 
would become weakness. Even in 
our own time certain tendencies and 



SUNSET. 75 

desires, once necessary to survival, 
are a constant source of failure. 
Physical courage and the love of 
battle, for instance, are no great help 
 may even be hindrances  to a 
civilized man. And in a state of 
physical balance and security, power, 
intellectual as well as physical, would 
be out of place. For countless years 
I judged there had beeniio danger' 
of war or solitary violence, no danger 
from wild beasts, no wasting disease. 
to require strength of constitution,! 
no need of toil. For such a life,? 
what we should call the weak are asi 
well equipped as the strong, are, 
indeed, no longer weak. Better 
equipped indeed they are, for the 
strong would be fretted by an energy 
for which there was no outlet. No 
doubt the exquisite beauty of the 
buildings I saw was the outcome of 
the last surgings of the now purposeless energy of mankind before it 
settled down into perfect harmony 
with the conditions under which it 



76 THE TIME MACHINE. 

lived  the flourish of that triumph 

which began the last great peace. 

-t" This has ever been the fate of energy 

! in security ; it takes to art and to 

J eroticism, and then come languor 

i_and decay. 

" Even this artistic impetus would 
at last die away  had almost died in 
the Time I saw. To adorn themselves with flowers, to dance, to sing 
in the sunlight ; so much was left 
 of the artistic spirit, and no more. 
'  Even that would fade in the end 
  into a contented inactivity. We are 
kept keen on the grindstone of pain 
and necessity, and it seemed to me 
that here was that hateful grindstone 
broken at last ! 

" As I stood there in the gathering 
dark I thought that in this simple explanation I had mastered the problem 
of the world  mastered the whole 
secret of these delicious people. 
Possibly the checks they had devised 
for the increase of population had 
succeeded too well, and their num


SUNSET. 77 

bers had rather diminished than kept 
stationary. That would account for 
the abandoned ruins. Very simple 
was my explanation, and plausible 
enough  as most wrong theories are. 
 As I stood there musing over this 
too perfect triumph of man, the full 
moon, yellow and gibbous, came up 
out of an overflow of silver light in 
the northeast. The bright little figure ceased to move about below, a 
noiseless owl flitted by, and I shivered with the chill of the night. I 
determined to descend and find where 
I could sleep. 

" I looked for the building I knew. 
Then my eye traveled along to the 
figure of the white sphinx upon the 
pedestal of bronze, growing distinct 
as the light of the rising moon grew 
brighter. I could see the silver birch 
against it. There was the tangle of 
rhododendron bushes, black in the 
pale light, and there was the little 
lawn. I looked at the lawn again. 
A queer doubt chilled my com


7 THE TIME MACHINE. 

placency. No,' said I stoutly to 
myself, that was not the lawn.' 

 But it ivas the lawn. For the 
white leprous face of the sphinx was 
toward it. Can you imagine what I 
felt as this conviction came home to 
me ? But you cannot. The Time 
Machine was gone ! 

" At once, like a lash across the 
face, came the possibility of losing 
my own age, of being left helpless 
in this strange new world. The bare 
thought of it was an actual physical 
sensation. I could feel it grip me at 
the throat and stop my breathing. 




CHAPTER VL 

trbe Iftacbine 16 %obU 

N another moment I was 
in a passion of fear, and 
running with great, leaping strides down the slope. Once 
I fell headlong and cut my face. I 
lost no time in stanching the blood, 
but jumped up and ran on, with a 
warm trickle down my cheek and 
chin. All the time I ran I was saying to myself : ' They have moved it 
a little  pushed it under the bushes 
out of the way.' Nevertheless, I ran 
with all my might. All the time, 
with the certainty that sometimes 
comes with excessive dread, I knew 
that such assurance was folly, knew 
instinctively that the machine was 
removed out of my reach. 

" My breath came with pain. I 

79 



8o THE TIME MACHINE. 

suppose I covered the whole distance, from the hill crest to the little 
lawn, two miles perhaps, in ten minutes. And I am not a young man. 
I cursed aloud as I ran at my confident folly in leaving the machine, 
wasting good breath thereby. I 
cried aloud, and none answered. 
Not a creature seemed to be stirring 
in that moonlit world. 

" When I reached the lawn my 
worst fears were realized. Not a 
trace of the thing was to be seen. 
I felt faint and cold when I faced 
the empty space among the black 
tangle of bushes. I ran round it 
furiously, as if the thing might be 
hidden in a corner, and then stopped 
abruptly with my hands clutching 
my hair. Above me towered the 
sphinx upon the bronze pedestal, 
white, shining, leprous in the light 
of the rising moon. It seemed to 
smile in mockery of my dismay. 

" I might have consoled myself by 
imagining the little people had put 



THE MACHINE IS LOST. 8 1 

the mechanism in some shelter for 
me, had not I felt assured of their 
physical and intellectual inadequacy. 
That is what dismayed me : the sense 
of some hitherto unsuspected power 
through whose intervention my invention had vanished. Yet of one 
thing I felt assured : unless some 
other age had produced its exact 
duplicate, the machine could not 
have moved in Time. The attachment of the levers  I will show you 
the method later  prevented anyone 
from tampering with it in that way 
when they were removed. It had been 
moved, and was hid, only in Space. 
But, then, where could it be ? 

" I think I must have had a kind 
of frenzy. I remember running violently in and out among the moonlit 
bushes all round the sphinx, and 
startling some white animal that in 
the dim light I took for a small deer. 
I remember, too, late that night, beating the bushes with my clenched 
fists until my knuckles were gashed 



82 THE TIME MACHINE. 

and bleeding from the broken 
twigs. 

' Then, sobbing and raving in my 
anguish of mind, I went down to the 
great building of stone. The big 
hall was dark, silent, and deserted. 
I slipped on the uneven floor and fell 
over one of the malachite tables, 
almost breaking my shin. I lit a 
match and went on past the dusty 
curtains of which I have told you. 

" There I found a second great hall 
covered with cushions, upon which 
perhaps a score or so of the little people were sleeping. I have no doubt 
they found my second appearance 
strange enough, coming suddenly out 
of the quiet darkness with inarticulate 
noises and the splutter and flare of 
a match. For they had forgotten 
about matches. Where is my Time 
Machine ? ' I began, bawling like an 
angry child, laying hands upon them 
and shaking them up together. It 
must have been very queer to them. 
Some laughed, most of them looked 



THE MACHINE IS LOST. 83 

sorely frightened. When I saw them 
standing round me, it came into my 
head that I was doing as foolish a 
thing as it was possible for me to do 
under the circumstances, in trying 
to revive the sensation of fear. For 
reasoning from the daylight behavior 
I thought that fear must be forgotten. 

" Abruptly I dashed down the 
match, and knocking one of the people 
over in my course, went blundering 
across the big dining hall again out 
under the moonlight. I heard cries 
of terror and their little feet running 
and stumbling this way and that. 
I do not remember all I did as the 
moon crept up the sky. I suppose it 
was the unexpected nature of my 
loss that maddened me. I felt hopelessly cut off from my own kind, 
a strange animal in an unknown 
world. I must have raved to and 
fro, screaming and crying upon God 
and Fate. I have a memory of 
horrible fatigue, as the long night of 



84 THE TIME MACHINE. 

despair wore away, of looking in this 
innpossible place and that, of groping among moonlit ruins and touching strange creatures in the black 
shadows ; at last, of lying on the 
ground near the sphinx and weeping 
with absolute wretchedness, even 
anger at the folly of leaving the 
machine having leaked away with 
my strength. I had nothing left but 
misery. 
 Then I slept, and when I woke 
again it was full day, and a couple 
of sparrows were hopping around 
me upon the turf within reach of 
my arm. 

" I sat up in the freshness of the 
morning trying to remember how 
I had got there, and why I had such 
a profound sense of desertion and 
despair. Then things came clear in 
my mind. With the plain, reasonable 
daylight I could look my circumstances fairly in the face. I saw the 
wild folly of my frenzy overnight, 
and I could reason with myself. 



THE MACHINE IS LOST. 8S 
 Suppose the worst,' said I, 'suppose the machine altogether lost  
perhaps destroyed. It behooves me 
to be calm and patient, to learn the 
way of the people, to get a clear idea 
of the method of my loss and the 
means of getting materials and tools ; 
so that in the end, perhaps, I may 
make another. That would be my 
only hope, a poor hope, perhaps, but 
better than despair. And, after all, 
it was a beautiful and curious world. 

" But probably the machine had 
only been taken away. Still, I must 
be calm and patient, find its hiding 
place, and recover it by force or 
cunning.' And with that I scrambled 
to my feet and looked about me, 
wondering where I could bathe. I 
felt weary, stiff, and travel-soiled. 
The freshness of the morning made 
me desire an equal freshness. I had 
exhausted my emotion. Indeed, as 
I went about my business, I found 
myself wondering at my intense excitement overnight. 



86 THE TIME MACHINE. 

" That morning I made a careful 
examination of the ground about the 
little lawn. I wasted some time in 
futile questionings conveyed as well 
as I was able to such of the little 
people as came by. They all failed 
to understand my gestures  some 
were simply stolid ; some thought it 
was a jest, and laughed at me. I 
had the hardest task in the world to 
keep my hands off their pretty, laughing faces. It was a foolish impulse, 
but the devil begotten of fear and 
blind anger was ill curbed, and still 
eager to take advantage of my perplexity. The turf gave better counsel. I found a groove ripped in it, 
about midway between the pedestal 
of the sphinx and the marks of my 
feet where, on arrival, I had struggled 
with the overturned machine. There 
were other signs of the removal of 
a heavy body about, of queer, narrow 
footprints like those I could imagine 
made by a sloth. This directed my 
closer attention to the pedestal. It 



THE MACHINE IS LOST. 87 

was, as I think I have said, of bronze. 
It was not a mere block, but highlydecorated with deep-framed panels 
on either side. I went and rapped 
at these. The pedestal was hollow. 
Examining the panels with care, I 
found them discontinuous with the 
frames. There were no handles nor 
keyholes, but possibly the panels, if 
they were doors, as I supposed, opened 
from within. One thing was clear 
enough to my mind. It took no verygreat mental effort to infer that my 
Time Machine was inside that pedestal. But how it got there was a 
different problem. 

" I saw the heads of two orange-clad 
people coming through the bushes 
and under some blossom-covered 
apple trees toward me. I turned, 
smiling, to them, and beckoned them 
to me. They came, and then, pointing to the bronze pedestal, I tried to 
intimate my wish to open it. But at 
my first gesture toward this, they behaved very oddly. I don't know how 



88 THE TIME MACHINE. 

to convey their expression to you. 
Suppose you were to use a grossly 
improper gesture to a delicate-minded 
woman  it is how she would look. 
They went off as if they had received 
the last possible insult. 
' However, I wanted access to the 
Time Machine ; so I tried a sweetlooking little chap in white next, with 
exactly the same result. Somehow, 
his manner made me ashamed of 
myself. But, as I say, I wanted the 
Time Machine. I tried one more. 
As he turned off like the others, my 
temper got the better of me. In 
three strides I was after him, had him 
by the loose part of his robe round 
the neck, and began dragging him 
toward the sphinx. Then I saw the 
horror and repugnance of his face, 
and all of a sudden I let him go. 
 But I was not beaten yet. I 
banged with my fist at the bronze 
panels. I thought I heard something 
stir inside  to be explicit, I thought 
I heard a sound like a chuckle  but 



THE MACHINE IS LOST. 89 

I must have been mistaken. Then I 
got a big pebble from the river, and 
came and hammered till I had flattened a coil in the decorations, and 
the verdegris came off in powdery 
flakes. The delicate little people 
must have heard me hammering in 
gusty outbreaks a mile away on either 
hand, but nothing came of it. I saw 
a crowd of them upon the slopes, 
looking furtively at me. At last, hot 
and tired, I sat down to watch the 
place. But I was too restless to 
watch long, and, besides, I am too 
Occidental for a long vigil. I could 
work at a problem for years, but to 
wait inactive for twenty-four hours  
that is another matter. 
 I got up after a time, and began 
walking aimlessly through the bushes 
toward the hill again. 

" Patience,' said I to myself. If 
you want your machine again, you 
must leave that sphinx alone. If 
they mean to take your machine 
away, it's little good your wrecking 



90 THE TIME MACHINE. 

their bronze panels, and if they don't, 
you will get it back so soon as you 
can ask for it. To sit among all 
those unknown things before a puzzle 
like that is hopeless. That way lies 
monomania. Face this world. Learn 
its ways ; watch it ; be careful of too 
hasty guesses at its meaning. In the 
end you will find clews to it all.' 

" Then suddenly the humor of the 
situation came into my mind : the 
thought of the years I had spent in 
study and toil to get into the future 
age, and now my passion of anxiety 
to get out of it. I had made myself 
the most complicated and the most 
hopeless trap that ever a man devised. 
Although it was at my own expense, 
I could not help myself. I laughed 
aloud. 
' Going through the big palace it 
seemed to me that the little people 
avoided me. It may have been 
my fancy, or it may have had 
something to do with my hammering 
at the gates of bronze. Yet I felt 



THE MACHINE IS LOST. 9 1 

tolerably sure of the avoidance. I 
was careful, however, to show no 
concern, and to abstain from any 
pursuit of them, and in the course of 
a day or two things got back to the 
old footing. 




CHAPTER VII. 

tTbe Strange BnimaL 

MADE what progress I 
could in the language, and 
in addition I pushed my explorations here and there. Eitiier I 
missed some subtle point or their 
language was excessively simple, almost exclusively composed of concrete substantives and verbs. There 
seemed to be few, if any, abstract 
terms, or little use of figurative language. Their sentences were usually 
simple and of two words, and I failed 
to convey or understand any but the 
simplest propositions. I determined 
to put the thought of my Time Machine, and the mystery of the bronze 
doors under the sphinx, as much as 
possible in a corner of my memory 
until my growing knowledge would 
92 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. 93 

lead me back to them in a natural 
way. Yet a certain feeling you may 
understand tethered me in a circle of 
a few miles round the point of my 
arrival. 

" So far as I could see, all the world 
displayed the same exuberant richness as the Thames valley. From 
every hill I climbed I saw the same 
abundance of splendid buildings, 
endlessly varied in material and style, 
the same clustering thickets of evergreens, the same blossom-laden trees 
and tree ferns. Here and there 
water shone like silver, and beyond, 
the land rose into blue undulating 
hills and so faded into the serenity of 
the sky. 

" A peculiar feature that presently 
attracted my attention was certain 
circular wells that appeared to sink 
to a profound depth. One layby the 
path up the hill which I had followed during my first walk. These 
wells were rimmed with bronze, curiously wrought, and often protected 



94 THE TIME MACHINE. 

by small cupolas from the rain. Sitting by the side of these, and peering 
down, I failed to see any gleam 
of water, and could catch no reflection from a lighted match. I 
heard a peculiar dull sound ; thud, 
thud, thud, like the beating of some 
big engine, and I discovered from the 
flaring of the match that a steady 
current of air set down the shaft. 

" Moreover, I carelessly threw a 
scrap of paper into the throat of the 
well, and instead of fluttering slowly 
down, it was at once sucked swiftly 
out of sight. After a time, too, I 
came to connect with these wells certain tall towers that stood here and 
there upon the hill slopes. Above 
tliese there was often apparent a peculiar flicker of the air, much as one 
sees it on a hot day above a sunscorched beach. 

"Putting these things together there 
certainly seemed to me a strong suggestion of an extensive system of 
subterraneous ventilation, though its 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. 95 

true import was difficult to imagine. I was at first inclined to associate it with the sanitary apparatus 
of these people. It was the obvious 
suggestion of these things, but it was 
absolutely wrong. 

" And here I must admit that I 
learned very little of drains, and 
bells, and modes of conveyance and 
the like conveniences during my time 
in this real future. In some of the 
fictitious visions of Utopias and 
coming times I have read, there is a 
vast amount of detail about building 
construction and social arrangements and so forth. But while such 
details are easy enough to obtain 
when the whole world lies in one's 
imagination, they are altogether inaccessible to a real traveler amid 
such realities as surrounded me. 
Conceive what tale of London a 
negro from Central Africa would 
take back to his tribe. What would 
he know of railway companies, of 
social movements, of telephone and 



9 THE TIME MACHINE. 

telegraph wires, of the parcels delivery company, and postal orders ? 
And yet we at least would be willing 
enough to explain these things. And 
even of what he knew, how much 
could he make his untraveled friend 
believe ? Then think how little is 
the gap between a negro and a man 
of our times, and how wide the interval between myself and the Golden 
Age people. I was sensible of much 
that was unseen, and which contributed to my comfort, but save for 
a general impression of automatic 
organization, I fear I can convey very 
little of the difference to your minds. 
" In the matter of sepulcher, for 
instance, I could see no traces of 
crematoria or anything suggestive of 
tombs. But it occurred to me that 
possibly cemeteries or crematoria 
existed at some spot beyond the 
range of my explorations. This 
again was a question I deliberately 
put to myself, and upon which my 
curiosity was at first entirely de


THE STRANGE ANIMAL. 97 

feated. Neither were there any old 
or infirm among them. 

" I must confess that my satisfaction with my first theories at an 
automatic civilization and a decadent 
humanity did not endure. Yet I 
could think of none other. Let me 
put my difficulties. The several big 
palaces I had explored were mere 
living places, great dining halls and 
sleeping apartments. I could find 
no machinery, no appliances of any 
kind. Yet these people were clothed 
in pleasant fabrics that must at times 
need renewal, their sandals though 
without ornament were fairly complex specimens of metal work. 
Somehow such things must be made. 
And the little people displayed no 
vestige of the creative tendencies of 
our time. There were no shops, no 
workshops, no indications of importations from any other part of the 
earth. They spent all their time irh k  
playing gently, in bathing in the ] 
river, in making love in a half playt 



98 THE TIME MACHINE. 

ful fashioHj in eating fruit, and sleeping. I could not see how things 
were kept going. 

"Then again about the Time 
Machine. Something, I knew not 
what, had taken it into the hollow 
pedestal of the sphinx. Why ? For 
the life of me I could not imagine. 

"ijThen there were those wells without water, those flickering pillars. I 
felt I missed a clew somewhere. I 
felt  how shall I say it ? Suppose 
you found an inscription with sentences here and there in excellent 
plain English, and interpolated 
therewith others made up of words, 
even of letters, absolutely unknown 
to you. That was how the world of 
802,701 presented itself to me on the 
third day of my stay. 
' On that day, too, I made a friend 
 of a sort. It happened that as I 
was watching some of the little people 
bathing in a shallow of the river, 
one of them was seized with cramp 
and began drifting down the stream. 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. 99 

The main current of the stream ran 
rather swiftly there, but not too 
swiftly for even a moderate swimmer. 
It will give you an idea, therefore, of 
the strange want of ideas of these peO" 
pie, wTie"ri~TTelT"you fhal none made 
the slightest attempt to rescue the 
weakly, crying little creature who 
was drowning before their eyes. 

" When I realized this I hurriedly 
slipped off my garments, and wading 
in from a point lower down, caught 
the poor little soul and brought her 
to land. 
 A little rubbing of the limbs soon 
brought her round, and I had the 
satisfaction of seeing that she was all 
right before I left her. I had got to 
such a low estimate of these little 
folks that I did not expect gratitude. 
In that, however, I was wrong. 

" The incident happened in the 
morning. In the afternoon I met 
my little woman, as I believe it was, 
when I was returning toward my 
center from one of my explorations, 



lOO THE TIME MACHINE. 

and she received me with cries of 
delight and presented me with a big 
garland of flowers  evidently prepared for me. 

" The action took my imagination. 
Very possibly I had been feeling 
desolate. At any rate I did my best 
to display my appreciation of the 
gift. 

" We were soon seated together in 
a little stone arbor, engaged in a 
conversation that was chiefly smiles. 

" The little creature's friendliness 
affected me exactly as a child's 
might. We passed each other 
flowers and she kissed my hands. I 
did the same to hers. Then I tried 
conversation and found out her name 
was Weena, which, though I don't 
know what it meant, somehow 
seemed appropriate enough. That 
was the beginning of a queer friendship that lasted altogether a week 
and ended  as I will tell you. 

" She was exactly like a child. She 
wanted to be with me always. She 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. lOI 

tried to follow me everywhere, and it 
went to my heart to tire her out upon 
my -next exploration and leave her 
behind at last exhausted, and calling 
after me rather plaintively. But the 
problems of the world had to be 
mastered. I had not, I said to myself, come into the future to carry on 
a miniature flirtation. Yet her distress when I left her was very great, 
her expostulations at the parting 
sometimes frantic, and I think altogether I had as much trouble as 
comfort from her affection. And 
yet she was, somehow, a very great 
comfort. 

"I thought it was mere childish 
affection that made her cling to me. 
Until it was too late, I did not 
clearly know what I had inflicted 
upon her when I left her. Nor, until 
it was too late, did I clearly understand what she was to me. For the 
little doll of a creature, by merely 
seeming fond of me and showing in 
her weak futile way that she cared 



102 THE TIME MACHINE. 

for me, presently gave ray return to 
the neighborhood of the white 
sphinx, almost the feeling of coming 
home. I would watch for her little 
figure of white and gold so soon as I 
came over the hill. 

" It was from her, too, that I learned 
that fear had not altogether left the 
world. She was fearless enough in 
the daylight, and she had the oddest 
confidence in me  for once in a foolish moment I made threatening 
grimaces at her, and she simply 
laughed at them. But she dreaded 
the dark, dreaded shadows, dreaded 
black things. Darkness to her was 
the one fearful thing. It was a 
singularly passionate dread, and it 
set me thinking and observing. I 
discovered then, among other things, 
that these little people gathered into 
the great houses after dark, and slept 
a number together. To enter upon 
them without a light was to put them 
into a tumult of apprehension. I 
never found one out of doors or one 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. IO3 

sleeping alone within doors after 
dark. 

" Yet I was still such a blockhead 
that I missed the lesson of that fear, 
and in spite of Weena's evident distress insisted upon sleeping away 
from these slumbering heaps of 
humanity. It troubled her greatly, 
but usually her odd affection for me 
triumphed, and for five of the nights 
of our acquaintance, including the last 
night of all, she slept with her head 
pillowed beside mine. But my story 
slips away from me as I speak of her. 

' It must have been on the night before I rescued Weena that I woke up 
about dawn. I had been restless, 
dreaming most disagreeably that I 
was drowned and that sea anemones 
were feeling over my face with their 
soft palps. I awoke with a start, and 
with an odd fancy that some grayish 
animal had just rushed out of the 
chamber in which I slept. 

I tried to get to sleep again, but I 
felt restless and uncomfortable. It 



104 THE TIME MACHINE. 

was that dim gray hour when things 
are just creeping out of the darkness, 
when everything is colorless and 
clear cut and yet unreal. I got up 
and went down into the great hall 
and out upon the flagstones in front 
of the palace. I thought I would 
make a virtue of necessity and see 
the sunrise. 

"The moon was setting, and the 
dying moonlight and first pallor of 
dawn mingled together in a ghastly 
half-light. The bushes were inky 
black, the ground a somber gray, the 
sky colorless and cheerless. And up 
the hill slope I thought I saw ghosts. 
Three several times as I scanned the 
slope I saw white figures. Twice I 
fancied I saw a solitary white apelike creature running rather quickly 
up the hill, and once near the ruins I 
saw a group of two carrying some 
dark body. They moved hastily. I 
did not see what became of them. 
It seemed that they vanished among 
the bushes. 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. I05 

" The dawn was still indistinct, you 
must understand. I was feeling that 
chill, uncertain, early morning feeling you may have experienced. I 
doubted my eyes. As the eastern 
sky grew brighter, and the light of 
the day increased, and vivid coloring 
came back to the world once more, I 
scanned the view keenly, but I saw 
no confirmation of my white figures. 
They were mere creatures of the half 
light. 

" They must have been ghosts," 
said I ; "I wonder whence they 
dated.' 

" For a queer notion of Grant 
Allen's came into my head and 
amused me. If each generation dies 
and leaves ghosts, he argues, the 
world at last will get overcrowded 
with them. On that theory they 
would have become very thick in 
eight hundred thousand years from 
now, and it was no great wonder to 
see four all at once. But the jest 
was unsatisfactory, and I was think


I06 THE TIME MACHINE. 

ing of these figures all the morning 
until the rescue of Weena drove the 
subject out of my head. I associated 
them in some indefinite way with the 
white animal I had startled in my 
first passionate search for the Time 
Machine. But Weena was a pleasant 
substitute for such a topic. 
 These ghostly shapes were soon 
destined to take possession of my 
mind in a far more vivid fashion. I 
think I have said how much hotter 
than our own was the weather of this 
future age. I cannot account for it. 
It may be the sun was hotter, or else 
the earth was nearer the sun. It is 
usual to assume that the sun will go 
on cooling steadily in the future, but 
people unfamiliar with such speculations as those of the younger Darwin, 
forget that the planets must ultimately, one by one, fall back into the 
parent body. As these catastrophies 
occur the sun will blaze out again 
with renewed energy. It may be 
that some inner planet had suffered 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. I07 

this fate. Whatever the reason, the 
fact remains that the sun was very 
much hotter than it is now. 

" It was one very hot morning, my 
fourth morning, I think, as I was 
seeking a refuge from the heat and 
glare in a colossal ruin near the great 
house where I sheltered, that this 
remarkable incident occurred. Clambering among these heaps of masonry, 
I found a long narrow gallery, the end 
and side windows of which were 
blocked by fallen masses of masonry 
and which by contrast with the brilliance outside seemed at first impenetrably dark to me. 

" I entered it groping, for the change 
from light to blackness made spots of 
color swim before me. Suddenly I 
halted spell-bound. A pair of eyes, 
luminous by reflection against the 
daylight without, was watching me 
out of the obscurity ! 

" The old instinctive dread of wild 
animals came upon me. I clenched 
my hands and steadfastly looked into 



Io8 THE TIME MACHINE. 

the glaring eyeballs. I feared to 
turn. Then the thought of the absolute security in which humanity 
appeared to be living came to my 
mind. Then I remembered that 
strange dread of the dark. 
 Overcoming my fear to some 
extent, I advanced a step, and 
spoke. I will admit that my voice 
was hoarse and ill controlled. I put 
out my hand, and touched something soft. 

" At once the eyes darted sideways, 
and something white ran past me. I 
turned, with my heart in my mouth, 
and saw a queer little ape-like figure, 
with the head held down in a peculiar manner, running across the sunlit space behind me. It blundered 
against a block of granite, staggered 
aside, and in a moment was hidden 
in a black shadow beneath another 
pile of ruined masonry. 

" My impression of it was of course 
very imperfect. It was of a dull 
white color, and had strange, large. 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. lO 

grayish-red eyes. There was some 
flaxen hair on its head and down its 
back. But, as I say, it went too 
fast for me to see distinctly. I cannot even say whether it ran on all 
fours, or only with its fore arms held 
very low. 

" After a momentary hesitation I 
followed the creature into the second 
heap of ruins. I could not find it 
there at first, but after a time, in the 
profound obscurity I came upon one 
of those round, well-like openings, 
of which I have told you, half closed 
by a fallen pillar. A sudden thought 
came to me. Could the thing have 
vanished down the shaft ? I lit a 
match, and, looking down, saw a 
small white moving figure, with large 
bright eyes, that regarded me steadfastly as it retreated. 

" The thing made me shudder. It 
was so like a human spider. It was 
clambering down the wall of the 
shaft, and now I noticed for the first 
time a number of metal projections 



110 THE TIME MACHINE. 

for foot and hand, forming a kind of 
ladder down. 
 Suddenly the light burned my 
fingers and fell out of my hand, 
going out as it dropped ; and when 
I had lit another, the little monster 
had disappeared. 

" I do not know how long I sat 
peering down the portentous well. 
Very slowly could I persuade myself 
that the thing I had seen was a man. 
But gradually the real truth dawned 
upon me ; that man had not remained 
one species, but had differentiated 
into two distinct animals ; that my 
graceful children of the upperworld 
were not the only descendants of the 
men of my generation, but that this 
bleached, nocturnal thing that had 
flashed before me, was also heir to 
our age. 

" I thought of the flickering pillars, 
and of my theory of an underground 
ventilation. I began to suspect their 
true import. 

" But what was this creature doing 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. m 

in my scheme of a perfectly balanced 
organization ? How was it related 
to the indolent serenity of the beautiful overworld people ? And what 
was hidden down below there ? I 
sat upon the edge of the well, telling 
myself I had nothing to fear in descending, and that there I must go 
for the solution of my difficulties, 
and withal I was absolutely afraid to 
go down. 

"As I hesitated, two of the beautiful 
upperworld people came running in 
their amorous sport, across the daylight into the shadow. One pursued 
the other, flinging flowers at her as 
he ran. They seemed disappointed 
when they found me with my arm 
against the overturned pillar, peering 
down the well. Apparently, it was 
considered bad form to notice these 
apertures, for when I pointed to it, 
and tried to frame a question about 
it in their tongue, they seemed distressed, and turned away. They 
were, however, interested by my 



112 THE TIME MACHINE, 

matches, and I struck several to 
amuse them. 

'' However, all my attempts to woo 
them toward the subject I wanted 
failed ; and presently I left them. 
I resolved to go back to Weena, and 
see what I could get from her. 
' But my mind was already in revolution, my guesses and impressions 
slipping and sliding to a new adjustment. I had now the clew to these 
wells, to the ventilating towers, to 
the problem of the ghosts, and a 
hint, indeed, of the meaning of the 
bronze gates and the fate of the Time 
Machine. Vaguely indeed, there 
came a suggestion toward the economic problem that had puzzled me. 
" Here was the new view : Evi: dently this second species of man 
was subterranean. There were three 
I circumstances m particular that 
I made me think its rare emergence 
upon the surface was the outcome 
of long subterraneous habit. In the 
first place, the bleached appearance, 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. 113 

common in most animals that live 
largely in the dark  the white fish 
of the Kentucky caves, for instance. 
Then the large eyes and their capacity for reflecting the light  a 
common feature of nocturnal eyes, 
witness the owl and the cat. And 
finally the evident confusion in the 
sunlight, the hasty flight toward dark 
shadow, and the carriage of the head 
while in the light, re-enforced the 
idea of an extremely sensitive retina. 

" Beneath my feet, then, the earth 
must be tunneled out to an enormous extent, and in these caverns 
the new race lived. The presence of 
ventilating shafts and wells all along 
the hill slopes  everywhere, in fact, 
except along the river valley  showed 
how universally the ramifications of 
the underworld extended. 

"And it was natural to assume that 
it was in the underworld that the 
necessary work of the overvorld was 
performed. This was so plausible 
that I accepted it unhesitatingly. 



114 THE TIME MACHINE. 

From that I went on to assume how 
the splitting of the human species 
came about. I dare say you will anticipate what shape my theory took, 
though I soon felt it was still short 
of the truth of the case. 
' But at first, starting from the 
problems of our own age, it seemed 
as clear as daylight to me that the 
gradual widening of the present 
merely temporary and social difference of the capitalist from the 
laborer was the key to the explanation. No doubt it will seem grotesque enough to you and wildly incredible, and yet even now there are 
circumstances that point in the way 
things have gone. There is a tendency plainly enough to utilize 
underground space for the less ornamental purposes of civilization ; 
there is the Metropolitan Railway in 
London, for instance, and all these 
new electric railways ; there are subways, and underground workrooms, 
restaurants, and so forth. Evidently, 



THE STRANG] ANIMAL. 11$ 

L .thought, this' tendency had increased until industry had gradually 
lost sight of the day, going into 
larger and larger underground factories, in which the workers would 
spend an increasing amount of their 
time. Even now, an East End 
worker lives in such artificial conditions as practically to be cut off from 
the natural surface of the earth and 
the clear sky altogether. 

" Then again, the exclusive tendency of richer people, due, no\ 
doubt, to the increasing refinement 
of their education and the widening 
gulf between them and the rude violence of the poor, is already leading 
to the closing of considerable portions of the surface of the country 
against these latter. About London, 
for instance, perhaps half the prettier 
country is shut up from such intrusion. And the same widening gulf, 
due to the length and expense of the 
higher educational process and the 
increased facilities for, and tempta


Il6 THE TIME MACHINE. 

tion toward, forming refined habits 
among the rich, will make that frequent exchange between class and 
iclass, that promotion and inter! marriage which at present retards the 
splitting of our species along the 
lines of social stratification, less and 
less frequent. 

 So, in the end, you would have 
above ground the Haves, pursuing 
health, comfort, and beauty, and 
below ground the Have-nots ; the 
workers, getting continually adapted 
to their labor. No doubt, once they 
were below ground, considerable 
rents would be charged for the ventilation of their caverns. Workers 
Y who struck work would starve or be 
suffocated for arrears of ventilator 
rent ; workers who were so constituted as to be miserable and rebellious would die. In the end, if the 
balance was held permanent, the 
survivors would become as well 
adapted to the conditions of their 
subterranean life as the overworld 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. H? 

people were to theirs, and as happy 
in their way. It seemed to me that 
the refined beauty of the overworld, 
and the etiolated pallor of the lower, 
followed naturally enough. 

" The great triumph of humanity I 
had dreamed of now took a different 
shape in my mind. It had been no 
triumph of universal education and 
general co-operation, such as I had 
imagined at the first. Instead, I saw 
a real aristocracy, armed with a perfected science and working out to a 
logical conclusion the industrial sys- ;\ 
tem of to-day. The triumph of the\ \  
overworld humanity had not been ; \ 
simply a triumph over nature, but a .  
triumph over nature and their fellow- , 
men. 

" I must warn you this was my 
theory at the time. I had no convenient Cicerone on the pattern of 
the Utopian books. My explanation ,  
may be absolutely wrong. I still 
think it the most plausible one. Bu 
even on this supposition the balanc 



Il8 THE TIME MACHINE. 

civilization that was at last attained 
must have long since passed its 
zenith, and was now far gone in decay. The too perfect security of 
the overworld had led these to a 
slow movement of degeneration at 
last  to a general dwindling of size, 
strength, and intelligence. That I 
already saw clearly enough, but what 
had happened to the lower world I 
did not yet suspect. Yet from what 
I had seen of the Morlocks,  that, by 
the bye, was the name by which these 
creatures were called,  I could imagine the modification of the human 
type was far more profound in the 
underworld than among the Eloij the 
beautiful races that I already knew. 
" Then came some troublesome 
doubts. Why had the Morlocks 
taken my Time . Machine ? For I 
" felt sure these underpeople had taken 
it. Why, too, if the Eloi 'were 
masters, could they not restore the 
<-hing to me ? And why were the 
subi.i so afraid of the dark ? 



THE STRANGE ANIMAL. Hg 

"I determined, as I have said, to 
question Weena about this underworld, but here again I was disappointed. At first she would not 
understand my questions, and then 
she refused to answer. She shivered 
as though the topic was unendurable. 
And when I pressed her, perhaps a 
little harshly, she burst into tears. 

" They were the only tears I ever 
saw in that future age, except my 
own. When I saw them I ceased 
abruptly to trouble about the Morlocks, and was only concerned_in 
driving these signs of her human inheritance out of her eyes again. And 
presently she was smiling and clapping her hands while I solemnly burnt 
a match. 



j t -'tV 



 



H-U 



.'J. 




CHAPTER VIII. 

Zbc I!borlocft0 

T may seem odd to you, but 
it was two days before I 
could follow up the clew of 
these Morlocks in what was manifestly the proper way, and descend 
into the well. I felt a peculiar shrinking from their pallid bodies. They 
were just the half-bleached color of 
the worms and things one sees preserved in spirit in a zoological 
museum. And they were cold to the 
touch. Probably my shrinking was 
largely due to the sympathetic influence of the Eloi, whose disgust of the 
Morlocks I now began to appreciate. 
" The next night I did not sleep very 
well. Possibly my health was a little 
disordered. I was oppressed with 
doubt and perplexity. Once or twice 



THE MORLOCKS. 121 

I had a feeling of intense fear for 
which I could perceive no definite 
reason. I remember creeping noiselessly into the great hall where the 
little people were sleeping in the 
moonlight  that night it was that 
Weena was among them  and feeling reassured by their presence. It 
occurred to me even then that when 
in the course of a few days the moon 
passed through its last quarter and 
the nights became dark, the appearance of these unpleasant creatures 
from below, these whitened Lemurs, 
these new vermin that had replaced 
the old, might be more abundant. 

"On both these days I had the restless feeling of one who shirks an inevitable duty. I felt assured that the 
Time Machine was only to be recovered by boldly penetrating these 
subterranean mysteries. Yet I could 
not face it. If I had only had a 
companion it would have been different. But I was so horribly alone, 
and even to clamber down into 



122 THE TIME MACHINE. 

the darkness of the well appalled 
me. 

" I don't know if you will understand my feeling, but I never felt 
quite safe at my back. 

" It was this restless feeling, perhaps, that drove me further than I had 
hitherto gone in my exploring expeditions. Going to the southwestward 
toward the rising country that is now 
called Combe Wood, I observed far 
off, in the direction of nineteenth 
century Banstead, a vast green pile, 
of a different character from any I 
had hitherto seen. It was larger 
than even the largest of the palaces 
or ruins I knew, and the fagade appeared to me Oriental in its character. 
The face of it had the luster as well 
as the pale green tint, a kind of bluish 
green, of a certain type of Chinese 
porcelain. The difference in appearance in the building suggested a difference in its use. I was minded to 
push on and explore it. But the day 
was growing late and I had come 



THE MORLOCKS. 123 

upon the sight of the place after a 
long and tiring circuit. I resolved 
to postpone this examination for the 
following day, and returned to the 
welcome and caresses of little Weena. 

"But the next morning I was in a 
mood of remorse for my hesitation in 
descending the well and facing the 
Morlocks in their caverns. I perceived my curiosity regarding this 
great pile of Green Porcelain was a 
mere self-deception to shirk the experience I dreaded by another day. 
I resolved I would make the descent 
without further waste of time, and 
started out in the early morning toward a well near the ruins of granite 
and aluminum. 

" Little Weena ran by my side. She 
followed me to the well dancing, but 
when she saw me lean over the mouth 
and look downward, she seemed 
strangely disconcerted. 

" ' Good-by, little Weena said I, 
kissing her, and then putting her 
down I began to feel over the parapet 



124 THE TIME MACHINE. 

for the climbing hooks  rather hastily, for I feared my courage might 
leak away. 

 At first Weena watched me in 
amazement, and then she gave a most 
piteous cry, and running to me began to pull at me with her little 
hands. 1 think her opposition nerved 
me rather to proceed. I shook her 
off, perhaps a little roughly, and in 
another moment I was in the throat 
of the well. 

" I saw her agonized face over the 
parapet, and smiled to reassure her. 
Then I had to look down at the unstable hooks by which I hung. 

" I had to clamber down a shaft of 
perhaps two hundred yards. The 
descent was effected by means of metallic bars projecting from the sides 
of the well, and since they were 
adapted to the needs of a creature much 
smaller and lighter than myself, I 
was speedily cramped and fatigued 
by the descent. And not simply 
fatigued. My weight suddenly bent 



THE MORLOCKS, 125 

one of the hooks and almost swung 
me off it down into the blackness 
beneath. 
 For a moment I hung by one hand, 
and after that experience I did not 
dare to rest again, and though my 
arms and back were presently acutely 
painful, I continued to clamber with 
as quick a motion as possible down 
the sheer descent. Glancing upward 
I saw the aperture, a mere small blue 
disk above me, in which a star was 
visible, and little Weena's head appeared as a round black projection. 
The thudding sound of some machine 
below me grew louder and more 
oppressive. Everything save that 
minute circle above was profoundly 
dark. When I looked up again 
Weena had disappeared. 

" I was in an agony of discomfort. 
I had some thought of trying to go 
up the shaft again, and leave the 
underworld alone. But while I 
turned this over in my mind I continued to descend. 



126 THE TIME MACHINE. 

" It was with intense relief that I 
saw dimly coming up a foot to the 
right of me, a slender loophole in the 
wall of the shaft, and swinging myself 
in, found it was the aperture of a 
narrow horizontal tunnel in which I 
could lie down and rest. 

" It was not too soon. My arms 
ached, my back was cramped, and I 
was trembling with the prolonged 
fear of falHng. Besides this, the unbroken darkness had had a distressing effect upon my eyes. The air was 
full of the throbbing and hum of the 
machinery that pumped the air down 
the shaft. 

" I do not know how long I lay in 
that tunnel. I was roused by a soft 
hand touching my face. Starting up 
in the darkness, I snatched at my 
matches and hastily striking one saw 
three grotesque, white creatures, similar to the one I had seen above 
ground in the ruin, hastily retreating 
before the light. Living as they did 



THE MORLOCKS. 127 

in what appeared to me impenetrable 
darkness, their eyes were abnormally 
large and sensitive, just as are the eyes 
of the abyssmal fishes or of any purely 
nocturnal creatures, and they reflected the light in the same way. I 
have no doubt they could see me in 
that rayless obscurity, and they did 
not seem to have any fear of me 
apart from the light. But so soon as 
I struck a match in order to see them, 
they fled incontinently, vanishing up 
dark gutters and tunnels from which 
their eyes glared at me in the strangest 
fashion. 

" I tried to call to them, but what 
language they had was apparently 
a different one from that of the overworld people. So that I was needs 
left to my own unaided exploration. 
The thought of flight rather than exploration was even at that time in 
my mind. 

You are in for it now,' said I to 
myself, and went on. 

" Feeling my way along this tunnel 



128 THE TIME MACHINE. 

of mine, the confused noise of 
machinery grew louder, and presently 
the walls fell away from me and I 
came to a large open space, and striking another match saw I had entered a vast arched cavern extending 
into darkness, at last, beyond the 
range of my light. 

" The view I had of this cavern was 
as much as one could see in the burning of a match. Necessarily my 
memory of it is very vague. Great 
shapes like big machines rose out of 
the dim and threw grotesque black 
shadows, in which the spectral Morlocks sheltered from the glare. The 
place, by the bye, was very stuffy and 
oppressive, and the faint halitus of 
freshly shed blood was in the air. 
Some way down the central vista 
was a little table of white metal upon 
which a meal seemed to be spread. 
The Morlocks at any rate were carnivorous. Even at the time I remember thinking what large animal 
could have survived to furnish the 



THE MORLOCKS. 1 29 

red joint I saw. It was all very indistinct, the heavy smell, the big unmeaning shapes, the white figures 
lurking in the shadows, and only 
waiting for the darkness to come at 
me again. Then the match burned 
down and stung my fingers and fell, 
a wriggling red spot in the black. 

" I have thought since how particularly ill equipped I was. When I 
had started with the Time Machine I 
had started with the absurd assumption that the men of the future would 
certainly be infinitely in front of us 
in all their appliances. I had come 
vithout arms, without medicine, without anything to smoke,  at times I 
missed tobacco frightfully, even 
without enough matches. If I had 
only thought of a kodak ! I could 
have flashed that glimpse of the underworld \n a second and examined 
it at leisure. But as it was, I stood 
there with only the weapons and 
powers that Nature had endowed me 
with hands, feet, and teeth except 



130 THE TIME MACHINE. 

four safety matches that still remained to me. 

" I was afraid to push my way in 
among all this machinery in the dark, 
and it was only with my last glimpse 
of light I discovered that my store of 
matches had run low. It had never 
occurred to me until that moment 
that there was any need to economize 
them, and I had wasted almost half 
of the box in astonishing the aboveground people, to whom fire was a 
novelty. As I say, I had four left. 

" Then while I stood in the dark a 
hand touched mine ; then some lank 
fingers came feeling over my face. 
I was sensible of a dull, unpleasant 
odor. I fancy I detected the 
breathing of a number of those little 
beings about me. I felt the box of 
matches in my hand being gently disengaged, and other hands behind me 
plucking at my clothing. 

" The sense of these unseen creatures examining me was indescribably 
unpleasant. The sudden realization 



THE MORLOCKS. 13 1 

of my ignorance of their ways of thinking and possible actions came home 
to me very vividly in the darkness. 
I shouted at them as loudly as I 
could. They started away from me, 
and then I could feel them approaching me again. They clutched at me 
more boldly, whispering odd sounds 
to each other. I shivered violently 
and shouted again, rather discordantly. This time they were not so 
seriously alarmed and made a queer 
laughing noise as they came toward 
me again. 
 I will confess I was horribly 
frightened. I determined to strike 
another match and escape under its 
glare. Eking it out with a scrap of 
paper from my pocket, I made good 
my retreat to the narrow tunnel. 
But hardly had I entered this when 
my light was blown out, and I could 
hear them in the blackness rustling 
like wind among leaves and pattering 
like the rain, as they hurried after me. 

" In a moment I was clutched by 



132 THE TIME MACHINE. 

several hands again, and there was 
no mistake now that they were trying 
to draw me back. I struck another 
light and waved it in their dazzled 
faces. You can scarcely imagine 
how nauseatingly inhuman those pale, 
chinless faces and great lidless, 
pinkish-gray eyes seemed, as they 
stared stupidly, evidently blinded by 
the light. 

"So I gained time and retreated 
again, and when my second match 
had ended struck my third. That 
had almost burned through as I 
reached the opening of the tunnel 
upon the well. I lay down on the 
edge, for the throbbing whirl of the 
air-pumping machine below made me 
giddy, and felt sideways for the projecting hooks. As I did so my feet 
were grasped from behind and I was 
violently tugged backward. I lit my 
last match  and it incontinently 
went out. But I had my hand on 
the climbing bars now, and kicking 
violently disengaged myself from the 



THE MORLOCKS. 133 

clutches of the Morlocks, and was 
speedily clambering up the shaft 
again. 

 They remained peering and blinking up the shaft, except one little 
wretch who followed me for some 
way, and indeed well-nigh captured 
my boot as a trophy. 
' That upward climb seemed unending. While I still had the last twenty 
or thirty feet of it above me, a deadly 
nausea came upon me. I had the 
greatest difficulty in keeping my hold. 
The last few yards was a frightful 
struggle against this faintness. 
Several times my head swam and I 
felt all the sensations of falling. 

" At last I got over the well mouth 
somehow and staggered out of the 
ruin into the blinding sunlight. I fell 
upon my face. Even the soil seemed 
sweet and clean. 

"Then I remember Weena kissing 
my hands and ears, and the voices of 
others of the Eloi. Then probably I 
was insensible for a time. 




CHAPTER IX. 

Wibcn tbe mm Came. 

OW, indeed, I seemed to be 
in a worse case than before. 
Hitherto, except during my 
night's anguish at the loss of the 
Time Machine, I had felt a sustaining hope of ultimate escape, but my 
hope was staggered by these new 
discoveries. Hitherto, I had merely 
thought myself impeded by the childish simplicity of the little people and 
by some unknown forces which I had 
only to understand in order to overcome. But there was an altogether 
new element in the sickening quality 
of the Morlocks, something inhuman 
and malign. Instinctively I loathed 
them. Before, I had felt as a man 
might feel who had fallen into a pit ; 
my concern was with the pit and 
134 



WHEN THE NIGHT CAME. 1 35 

how to get out again. But now I 
felt like a beast in a trap, whose 
enemy would presently comeo 
' The enemy I dreaded may surprise you. It was the darkness of the 
new moon. Weena had put this into 
my head by some, at first, incomprehensible remarks about the Dark 
Nights. It was not now such a very 
difficult problem to guess what the 
coming Dark Nights might mean. 
The moon was on the wane ; each 
night there was a longer interval of 
darkness. And I now understood, 
to some slight degree, at least, the 
reason of the fear of the little upperworld people for the dark. I wondered vaguely what foul villany it 
might be that the Morlocks did 
under the darkness of the new moon. 
" Whatever the origin of the existing conditions, I felt pretty sure now 
that my second hypothesis was all 
wrong. The upperworld people might 
once have been the favored aristocracy of the world, and the Morlocks 



 

V 



136 THE TIME MACHINE. 

their mechanical servants, but that 
state of affairs had passed away long 
since. The two species that had resulted from the evolution of man were 
sliding down toward, or had already 
arrived at, an altogether new relationship. The Eloi, like the Carlovingian 
kings, had decayed to a mere beautiful futility. They still possessed the 
earth on sufferance, since the Morlocks, subterranean for innumerable 
generations, had come at last to find 
the daylit surface unendurable. And 
the Morlocks made their garments, 
I inferred, and maintained them in 
their habitual need, perhaps through 
the survival of an old habit of service. They did it, as a standing 
horse paws with his foot, or as a man 
enjoys killing animals in sport  because ancient and departed necessities had impressed it on the organism. 
But clearly the old order was already 
in part reversed. The Nemesis of 
the delicate ones was creeping on 
apace. Ages ago, thousands of 



WHEN THE NIGHT CAME. 137 

generations ago, man had thrust his 
brother man out of the ease and sunlight of life. And now that brother 
was coming back  changed. Already 
the Eloi had begun to learn one old 
lesson anew. They were becoming "n 
acquainted again with Fear.  

''Then suddenly came into my 
head the memory of the meat I had 
seen in the underworld. It seemed 
odd how this memory floated into my 
mind, not stirred up, as it were, by 
the current of my meditations, but 
coming in almost like a question 
from outside. I tried to recall the 
form of it. I had a vague sense of 
something familiar, but at that time 
I could not tell what it was. 

" Still, however helpless the little 
people might be in the presence of 
their mysterious Fear, I was differently constituted. I came out of 
this age of oursthis ripe prime of 
the human race, when fear does not 
pafalyeand mystery has lost its 
terrors. I at least would defend 



138 THE TIME MACHINE. 

myself. Without further delay I determined to make myself arms and 
a fastness where I might sleep with 
some security. From that refuge as 
a base I could face the strange world 
with some confidence again, a confidence I had lost now that I realized 
to what uncanny creatures I nightly 
lay exposed. I felt I could never 
sleep again until my bed was secure 
from them. I shuddered with horror 
to think how they must already have 
examined me during my sleep. 
I wandered during the afternoon 
along the valley of the Thames, but 
found nothing that commended itself 
to my mind as a sufficiently inaccessible retiring place. All the buildings and trees seemed easily practicable to such dexterous climbers as 
the Morlocks  to judge by their 
wells  must be. Then the tall pinnacles of the Palace of Green Porcelain, and the polished gleam of its 
walls, came back to my memory, and 
in the evening, taking Weena like a 



WHEN THE NIGHT CAME. 139 

child upon my shoulder, I went up 
the hills toward the southwest. 

" Now the distance I had reckoned 
was seven or eight miles, but it must 
have been nearer eighteen. I had 
first seen the Palace on a moist afternoon when distances are deceptively 
diminished. In addition, the heel of 
one of my shoes was loose, and a nail 
was working through the sole,  they 
were comfortable old shoes I wear 
about indoors,  so that I was lame. 
It was already long past sunset before 
I came in sight of the Palace, standing out in black silhouette against the 
pale yellow of the sky, 

" Weena had been hugely delighted 
when first I carried her, but after a 
time she desired me to let her down 
and ran along by the side of me, occasionally darting off on either hand 
to pick flowers to stick in my pockets. 
My pockets had always puzzled 
Weena, but at the last she had concluded they were an eccentric kind 
of vases for floral decoration, At 



I40 THE TIME MACHINE. 

least she utilized them for that purpose. 

"And that reminds me ! As I 
changed my jacket I found " 

( The Time Traveler paused, put his 
hand into his pockety and silently placed 
two withered flowers not unlikevery 
large white malloivs, upon the little 
table. Then he resumed his narrative. ) 

" As the hush of evening crept over 
the world and we proceeded over the 
hill-crest toward Wimbledon, Weena 
became tired and wanted to return 
to the house of gray stone. But I 
pointed out the distant pinnacles of 
the Palace of Green Porcelain to her, 
and contrived to make her understand that we were seeking a refuge 
there from her Fear. 

"You know that great pause that 
comes upon things before the dusk. 
Even the breeze stops in the trees. 
There is to me always an air of expectation about tliat evening stillness. 
The sky was clear, remote, and empty, 



WHEN- THE NIGHT CAME. I4I 

save for a few horizontal bars far 
down in the sunset. 

" That night the expectation took 
the color of my fears. In the darkling calm my senses seemed preternaturally sharpened. I fancied I 
could even feel the hollowness of the 
ground beneath my feet, could indeed 
almost see through it, the Morlocks in 
their ant-hill going hither and thither 
and waiting for the dark. In this 
excited state I fancied that they 
would take my invasion of their burrows as a declaration of war. And 
why had they taken my Time Machine ? 

" So we went on in the quiet, and 
the twilight deepened into night. 
The clear blue of the distance faded 
and one star after another came out. 
The ground grew dim and the trees 
black. Weena's fears and her fatigue 
grew upon her. I took her in my 
arms and talked to her and caressed 
her. Then as the darkness grew 
profounder she put her arms round 



142 THE TIME MACHINE. 

my neck, and closing her eyes tightly 
pressed her face against my shoulder. 

" We went down a long slope into 
a valley, and there in the dimness I 
almost walked into a little river. This 
I waded, and went up the opposite 
side of the valley, past a number of 
sleeping houses, and by a statue that 
appeared to me in the indistinct light 
to represent a faun, or some such figure, minus the head. Here, too, were 
acacias. So far, I had seen nothing 
of the Morlocks, but it was yet early 
in the night, and the darker hours 
before the old moon rose were still 
to come. 

" From the brow of the next hill I 
saw a thick wood spreading wide and 
black before me. At this I hesitated. 
I could see no end to it either to the 
right or to the left. Feeling tired,  
my feet, in particular, were very sore, 
 I carefully lowered Weena from 
my shoulder as I halted, and sat 
down upon the turf. I could no 
longer see the Palace of Green Por


WHEN THE NIGHT CAME. 143 

celain, and I was in doubt of my 
direction. 
I looked into the thickness of the 
wood, and thought of what it might 
hide. Under that dense tangle of 
branches one would be out of sight 
of the stars. Even were there no 
other lurking danger there,  a danger 
I did not care to let my imagination 
loose upon,  there would still be all 
the roots to stumble over, and the 
tree boles to strike myself against. I 
was very tired, too, after the excitements of the day, and I decided that 
I would not face it, but would pass 
the night upon the open hill. 

" Weena, I was glad to discover, 
was fast asleep. I carefully wrapped 
her in my jacket, and sat down beside her to wait for the moonrise. 
The hillside upon which I sat was 
quiet and deserted, but from the 
black of the wood there came now 
and then a stir of living things. 

" Above me shone the stars, for 
the night was clear. I felt a certain 



144 THE TIME MACHINE. 

sense of friendly comfort in their 
twinkling. All the old constellations 
had gone from the sky, however, for 
that slow movement that is imperceptible in a dozen human lifetimes, 
had long ago rearranged them in unfamiliar groupings. But the Milky 
Way, it seemed to me, was still the 
same tattered streamer of star dust 
as of yore. Southward  as I judged 
it  was a very bright red star that 
was new to me. It was even more 
splendid than our own green Sirius. 
Amid all these scintillating points of 
light, one planet shone kindly and 
steadily like the face of an old 
friend. 

" Looking at these stars suddenly 
dwarfed my own troubles and all the 
gravities of terrestrial life. I thought 
of their unfathomable distance, and 
the slow, inevitable drift of their 
movements out of the unknown past 
into the unknown future. I thought 
of the great precessional cycle that 
the pole of the earth describes in the 



WHEN THE NIGHT CAME. 145 

heavens. Only forty times had that 
silent revolution occurred during all 
the years I had traversed. And during those few revolutions, all the 
activity, all the traditions, the carefully planned organizations, the nations, languages, literature, aspirations, even the mere memory of man 
as I knew man, had been swept out 
of existence. Instead were these 
frail creatures who had forgotten 
their high ancestry, and the white 
animals of which I went in fear. 
Then I thought of the great fear 
there was between these two species, 
and for the first time, with a sudden 
shiver, came the clear knowledge of 
what the meat I had seen might be. 
Yet it was too horrible ! I looked at 
little Weena sleeping beside me, her 
face white and starlike under the 
stars, and forthwith dismissed the 
thought from my mind. 

" Through that long night I kept 
my mind off the Morlocks as well as 
I could, and whiled away the time by 



146 THE TIME MACHINE. 

trying to fancy I could find traces of 
the old constellations among the new 
confusion. The sky kept very clear, 
except a hazy cloud or so. No doubt 
I dozed at times. Then, as my vigil 
wore on, came a faintness in the eastward sky like the reflection of some 
colorless fire, and the old moon rose 
thin and peaked and white. And 
close behind and overtaking it and 
overflowing it the dawn came, pale 
at first and then growing pink and 
warm. 

" No Morlocks had approached us. 
Indeed, I had seen none upon the 
hill that night. And in the confidence of renewed day it almost 
seemed to me that my fear had been 
unreasonable. I stood up, and found 
my foot with the loose heel swollen 
at the ankle and painful under the 
heel. I sat down again, took off my 
shoes, and flung them away. 

" I awakened Weena, and forthwith 
we went down into the wood, now 
green and pleasant, instead of black 



WHEN THE NIGHT CAME. 147 

and forbidding. And there we found 
some fruit wherewith to break our 
fast. We soon met others of the 
dainty ones, laughing and dancing in 
the sunh'ght, as though there was no 
such thing in nature as the night. 

" Then I thought once more of the 
meat that I had seen, I felt assured 
now of what it was, and, from the 
bottom of my heart, I pitied this last 
feeble rill from the great flood of 
humanity. Clearly, somewhere in 
the long ages of human decay, the 
food of the Morlocks had run short. 
Possibly they had lived on rats and 
suchlike vermin. Even now, man is 
far less discriminating and exclusive 
in his food than he was, far less than 
any monkey. His prejudice against 
human flesh is no deep-seated instinct. And so these inhuman sons 
of men 

" I tried to look at the thing in a 
scientific spirit. After all, these were 
scarcely to be counted human beings ; 
less human they were and more re


148 THE TIME MACHINE. 

mote than our cannibal ancestors 
of three or four thousand years ago. 
And the minds that would have made 
this state torment were gone. Why 
I should I trouble ? The Eloi were 
' mere fatted cattle, which the antlike 
Morlocks preserved and preyed upon, 
probably saw to the breeding of. 
And there was Weena dancing by 
my side ! 
' Then I tried to preserve myself 
from the horror that was coming 
upon me by regarding it as a rigorous punishment of human selfishness ; man liad been content to live 
in ease and delight upon the labors 
of his fellow-men ; had taken Necessity as his watchword and excuse, 
and in fullness of time Necessity had 
come home to him. I tried even a 
Carlyle-like scorn of these wretched 
aristocrats in decline. 

" But this attitude of mind was impossible. However great their intellectual degradation, the Eloi had 
kept too much of the human form 



WHEN THE NIGHT CAME. 149 

not to claim my sympathy, and to 
make me perforce a participant in 
their degradation and their Fea r j 
"I had at this time very vague 
ideas of what course I should pursue. 
My first idea was to secure some 
safe place of refuge for Weena and 
myself, and to make myself such 
arms of metal or stone as I could 
contrive. That necessity was immediate. In the next place, I hoped 
to procure some means of fire, so 
that I should have the weapon of a 
torch at hand, for nothing, I knew, 
would be more efficient against these 
Morlocks. Then I wanted to arrange some contrivance to break 
open the doors of bronze under the 
white sphinx. I had in mind a battering ram. I had a persuasion that 
if I could enter these doors and carry 
a blaze of light before me, I should 
discover the Time Machine and 
escape. I could not imagine the 
Morlocks were powerful enough to 
remove it far. Weena I had r 



I50 THE TIME MACHINE. 

solved to bring with me to our own 
Time. 

" Turning such schemes over in 
my mind, I pursued our way toward 
the building which my fancy had 
chosen as our dwelling-place. 




CHAPTER X. 

be ipalace of (Breen porcelain. 

HIS Palace of Green Porcelain, when we approached 
it about noon, was, I found, 
deserted and falling into ruin. Only 
ragged vestiges of glass remained in 
its windows, and great sheets of the 
green facing had fallen away in 
places from the corroded metallic 
framework. It lay very high upon a 
turfy down, and, looking northeastward before I entered it, I was surprised to see a large estuary, or an 
arm of the sea, where I judged 
Wandsworth and Battersea must 
once have been. I thought then  
though I never followed the thought 
up  of what might have happened, 
or might be happening, to the living 
things in the sea. 



152 THE TIME MACHINE. 
' The material of the Palace 
proved, on examination, to be indeed porcelain, and above the face 
of it I saw an inscription in some 
unknown characters. I thought, 
rather foolishly, that Weena might 
help me to interpret this, but I only 
learned that the bare idea of writing 
had never entered her head. She 
always seemed to me, I fancy, more 
human than she was, perhaps because her affection was so human. 

" Within the big valves of the 
door  which were open and broken  
we found, instead of the customary 
hall, a long gallery lit by many side 
windows. Even at the first glance I 
was reminded of a museum. The 
tiled floor was thick with dust, and a 
remarkable array of miscellaneous 
objects were shrouded in the same 
gray covering. Clearly, the place 
had been derelict for a very considerable time. 

" Then I perceived, standing strange 
and guant in the center of the hall, 



PA LA CE OF GREEN FORCE LA IN. 153 

what was clearly the lower part of the 
skeleton of some huge animal. As I 
approached this I recognized by the 
oblique feet that it was some extinct 
creature after the fashion of the megatherium. The skull and the upper 
bones lay beside it in the thick dust, 
and in one place where rain water 
had dripped through some leak in 
the roof, the skeleton had decayed 
away. Further along the gallery was 
the huge skeleton barrel of a broniosaurus. My museum hypothesis was 
confirmed. Going toward the side of 
the gallery I found what appeared to 
be sloping shelves, and clearing away 
the thick dust, I found the old familiar glass cases of our own time. But 
these must have been air-tight to judge 
from the fair preservation of some of 
their contents. 

" Clearly we stood among the ruins 
of some latter day South Kensington. 
Here apparently was the Palasontological Section, and a very splendid 
array of fossils it must have been ; 



154 THE TIME MACHINE. 

though the inevitable process of 
decay that had been warded off for a 
time, and had, through the extinction 
of bacteria and fungi, lost ninetynine-hundreths of its force, was 
nevertheless, with extreme sureness, 
if with extreme slowness, at work 
again upon all its treasures. Here 
and there I found traces of the little 
people in the shape of rare fossils 
broken to pieces or threaded in 
strings upon reeds. And the cases 
had in some instances been bodily 
removed  by the Morlocks, as I 
judged. 

" The place was very silent. The 
thick dust deadened our footsteps. 
Weena, who had been rolling a sea 
urchin down the sloping glass of a 
case, presently came, as I stared about 
me, and very quietly took my hand 
and stood beside me. 

" At first I was so much surprised 
by this ancient monument of an intellectual age that I gave no thought 
to the possibilities it presented me. 



PA LA CE OF GREEN PORCELA IN. 155 

Even my preoccupation about the 
Time Machine and the Morlocks 
receded a little from my mind. The 
curiosity concerning human destiny 
that had led to my time traveling 
was removed. Now, judging from 
the size of the place, this Palace of 
Green Porcelain had a great deal 
more in it than a gallery of palaeontology ; possibly historical galleries, 
it might be even a library. To me, 
at least in my present circumstances, 
these would be vastly more interesting 
than this spectacle of old-time geology 
in decay. 

" Exploring, I found another short 
gallery running transversely to the 
first. This appeared to be devoted 
to minerals, and the sight of a block 
of sulphur set my mind running on 
gunpowder. But I could find no 
saltpeter ; indeed no nitrates of any 
kind. Doubtless they had deliquesced ages ago. Yet the sulphur 
hung in my mind and set up a train 
of thinking. As for the rest of the 



156 THE TIME MACHINE. 

contents of that place, though on the 
whole they were the best preserved 
of all I saw  I had little interest. I 
am no specialist in mineralogy, and I 
soon went on down a very ruinous 
aisle running parallel to the first hall 
I had entered. 

" Apparently this section had been 
devoted to Natural History, but here 
everything had long since passed out 
of recognition. A few shriveled 
vestiges of what had once been 
stuffed animals, dried-up mummies 
in jars that had once held spirit, a 
brown dust of departed plants, that 
was all. I was sorry for this, because 
I should have been glad to trace the 
patient readjustments by which the 
conquest of animated nature had 
been attained. 

" From this we come to a gallery of 
simply colossal proportions, but singularly ill lit, and with its floor running 
downward at a slight angle from the 
end at which I entered it. At intervals there hung white globes from 



PA LA CE OF GREEN PORCELA IN. 157 

the ceiling,  many of them cracked 
and smashed,  which suggested that 
originally the place had been artificially lit. Here I was more in my element, for I found rising on either 
side of me the huge bulks of big machines, all greatly corroded, and many 
broken down, but some still fairly 
complete in all their parts. You 
know I have a certain weakness for 
mechanism, and I was inclined to 
linger among these, the more so since 
for the most part they had the inter- est of puzzles, and I could make 
only the vaguest guesses of what 
they were for. I fancied if I could 
solve these puzzles I should find 
myself in the possession of powers 
that might be of use against the Morlocks. 

''Suddenly Weena came very close 
to my side, so suddenly that she 
startled me. 

" Had it not been for her I do 
not think I should have noticed that 
the floor of the gallery sloped at 



158 THE TIME MACHINE. 

all The end I had entered was quite 
above ground, and was lit by rare 
slit-like windows. As one went down 
the length of the place, the ground 
came up against these windows, until there was at last a pit like the 
' area ' of a London house, before 
each, and only a narrow line of daylight at the top. 1 went slowly along, 
puzzling about the machines, and had 
been too intent upon them to notice 
the gradual diminution of the light, 
until Weena's increasing apprehension attracted my attention. 

" Then I saw that the gallery ran 
down at last into a thick darkness. 
I hesitated about proceeding, and 
then as I looked around me, I saw 
that the dust was here less abundant 
and its surface less even. Further 
away toward the dim, it appeared to 
be broken by a number of small narrow footprints. At that my sense of 
 It may be, of course, that the floor did not 
slope, but that the museum was built upon 
the side of the hill.  Editor. 



PALACE OF GREEN PORCELAIN. 159 

the immediate presence of the Morlocks revived. I felt that I was wasting my time in my academic examination of this machinery. I called 
to mind that it was already far advanced in the afternoon, and that I 
had still no weapon, no refuge, and no 
means of making a fire. And then, 
down in the remote black of the gallery, I heard a peculiar pattering and 
those same odd noises I had heard 
down the well. 

" I took Weena's hand. Then 
struck with a sudden idea, I left her, 
and turned to a machine from which 
X-)rojected a lever not unlike those in 
a signal box. Clambering upon the 
stand of the machine and grasping 
this lever in my hands, I put all my 
weight upon it sideways. Weena 
deserted in the central aisle, began 
suddenly to whimper. I had judged 
the strength of the lever pretty correctly, for it snapped after a minute's 
strain, and I rejoined Weena with a 
mace in my hand more than sufficient, 



l6o THE TIME MACHINE. 

I judged, for any Morlock skull I 
might encounter. 

" And I longed very much to kill 
a Morlock or so. Very inhuman, 
you may think, to want to go killing 
one's own descendants, but it was 
impossible somehow to feel any 
humanity in the things. Only my 
disinclination to leave Weena, and a 
persuasion that if I began to slake 
my thirst for murder my Time Machine might suffer, restrained me from 
going straight down the gallery and 
killing the brutes I heard there. 

" Mace in one hand and Weena in 
the other we went out of that gallery 
and into another still larger, which at 
the first glance reminded me of a 
military chapel hung with tattered 
flags. The brown and charred rags 
that hung from the sides of it, I 
presently recognized as the decaying 
vestiges of books. They had long 
since dropped to pieces and every 
semblance of print had left them. 
But here and there were warped and 



PA LA CE OF GREEN POR CELA IN. 1 6 1 

cracked boards and metallic clasps 
that told the tale well enough. 
' Had I been a literary man I might 
perhaps have moralized upon the 
futility of all ambition, but as it was, 
the thought that struck me with 
keenest force, was the enormous 
waste of labor rather than of hope, to 
which this somber gallery of rotting 
paper testified. At the time I will 
confess, though it seems a petty 
trait now, that I thought chiefly of 
the Philosophical Transactions, and 
my own seventeen papers upon 
physical optics. 

" Then going up a broad staircase 
we came to what may once have been 
a gallery of technical chemistry. 
And here I had not a little hope of 
discovering something to help me. 
Except at one end where the roof 
had collapsed, this gallery was well 
preserved. I went eagerly to every 
unbroken case. And at last, in one 
of the really air-tight cases, I found a 
box of matches. Very eagerly I 



1 62 THE TIME MACHINE. 

tried them. They were perfectly 
good. They were not even damp. 

" At that discovery I suddenly 
turned to Weena. Dance ! ' I cried 
to her in her own tongue. For now 
I had a weapon indeed against the 
horrible creatures we feared. And 
so in that derelict museum, upon the 
thick soft coating of dust, to Weena's 
huge delight, I solemnly performed 
a sort of composite dance, whistling 
' The Land of the Leal ' as cheerfully as I could. In part it was a 
modest cancan, in part a step dance, 
in part a skirt dance,  so far as my 
tail coat permitted,  and in part 
original. For naturally I am inventive, as you know. 

" Now, I still think that for this box 
of matches to have escaped the wear 
of time for immemorial years was a 
strange, and for me, a most fortunate 
thing. Yet oddly enough I found 
here a far more unlikely substance, 
and that was camphor. I found it in 
a sealed jar, that, by chance, I sup


PALACE OF GREEN PORCELAIN. 163 

posed had been really hermetically 
sealed. I fancied at first the stuff 
was paraffin wax and smashed 
the jar accordingly. But the odor 
of camphor was unmistakable. It 
struck me as singularly odd, that 
among the universal decay, this volatile substance had chanced to survive, 
perhaps through many thousand 
years. Is reminded me of a sepia 
painting I had once seen done from 
the ink of a fossil Belemnite that 
must have perished and become 
fossilized millions of years ago. I 
was about to throw this camphor on 
one side, and then remembering that 
it was inflammable and burnt with a 
good bright flame, I put it into my 
pocket. 

" I found no explosives, however, 
or any means of breaking down the 
bronze doors. As yet my iron crowbar was the most hopeful thing I had 
chanced upon. Nevertheless I left 
that gallery greatly elated by my discoveries. 



l64 THE TIME MACHINE. 
' I cannot tell you the whole story 
of my exploration through that long 
afternoon. It would require a great 
effort of memory to recall it at all in 
the proper order, I remember a long 
gallery containing the rusting stands 
of arms of all ages, and that I hesitated between my crowbar and a 
hatchet or a sword. I could not 
carry both, however, and my bar of 
iron, after all, promised best against 
the bronze gates. There were rusty 
guns, pistols, and rifles here ; most of 
them were masses of rust, but many 
of aluminum, and still fairly sound. 
But any cartridges or powder there 
may have been had rotted into dust. 
One corner I saw was charred and 
shattered ; perhaps, I thought, by an 
explosion among the specimens 
there. In another place was a vast 
array of idols  Polynesian, Mexican, 
Grecian, Phoenician, every country 
on earth, I should think. And here, 
yielding to an irresistible impulse, I 
wrote my name upon the nose of a 



PALACE OF GREEN PORCELAIN. 1 65 

Steatite monster from South America 
that particularly took my fancy. 

" As the evening drew on my interest waned. I went through gallery 
after gallery, dusty, silent, often ruirtous, the exhibits sometimes mere heaps 
of rust and lignite, sometimes fresiier. 
In one place I suddenly found myself near a model of a tin mine, and 
then by the merest accident I discovered in an air-tight case two dynamite cartridges ; I shouted ' Eureka ! ' 
and smashed the case joyfully. Then 
came a doubt. I hesitated, and then 
selecting a little side gallery I made 
my essay. I never felt such a bitter 
disappointment as I did then, waiting five, ten, fifteen minutes for the 
explosion that never came. Of 
course the things were dummies, as I 
might have guessed from their presence there. I really believe had they 
not been so, I should have rushed off 
incontinently there and then, and 
blown sphinx, bronze doors, and, as 
it proved, my chances of finding the 



1 66 THE TIME MACHINE. 

Time Machine all together into nonexistence. 

" It was after that, I think, that we 
came to a little open court within 
the palace, turfed and with three 
fruit trees. There it was we rested 
and refreshed ourselves. 

" Toward sunset I began to consider our position. Night was now 
creeping upon us and my inaccessible hiding-place was still to be found. 
But that troubled me very little now. 
I had in my possession a thing that 
was perhaps the best of all defenses 
against the Morlocks. I had matches 
again. I also had the camphor in my 
pocket if a blaze were required. It 
seemed to me that the best thing we 
could do would be to pass the night 
in the open again, protected by afire. 

" In the morning there was the 
Time Machine to obtain. Toward 
that as yet I had only my iron mace. 
But now with my growing knowledge 
I felt very differently toward the 
bronze doors than I had done 



PALACE OF GREEN PORCELAIN. 167 

hitherto. Up to this I had refrained 
from forcing them, largely because of 
the mystery on the other side. They 
had never impressed me as being 
very strong, and I hoped to find my 
bar of iron not altogether inadequate 
for the work. 




CHAPTER XI. 
ffn tbe H)arftne06 of the potest 

E emerged from the Palace of 
Green Porcelain while the 
sun was still in part above 
the horizon. I was determined to 
reach the white sphinx early the 
next morning, and I proposed before 
the dusk came to push through the 
woods that had stopped me on the 
previous journey. My plan was to 
go as far as possible that night, and 
then, building a fire about us, to 
sleep under the protection of its 
glare. Accordingly as we went along 
I gathered any sticks or dried grass I 
saw, and presently had my arms full 
of such litter. So loaded, our progress was slower than I had anticipated, and besides, VVeena was tired. 
I, too, began to suffer from sleepi
i68 



IN THE DA RKNESS OF THE FORES T. 169 

ness, and it was fully night before we 
reached the wood. 

"Now, upon the shrubby hill upon 
the edge of this, Weena would have 
stopped, fearing the darkness before 
us. But a singular sense of impending calamity, that should indeed have 
served me as a warning, drove me 
onward. I had been without sleep 
for the length of a night and two 
days, and I was feverish and irritable. 
I felt sleep coming upon me, and 
with it the Morlocks. 

"While we hesitated I saw among 
the bushes up the slope behind us, 
and dim against the sky, three 
crouching figures. There was scrub 
and long grass all about us, and I 
did not feel safe from their insidious 
approach. The forest, I calculated, 
was rather less than a mile in 
breadth. If we could get through 
it, the hillside beyond was bare, and 
to me it seemed an altogether safer 
resting-place. I thought that with 
my matches and the camphor T could 



lyo THE TIME MACHINE. 

contrive to keep my path illuminated 
through the woods. Yet it was evident that if I was to flourish matches 
with my hands I should have to 
abandon my firewood. So rather 
reluctantly I put this down. 

"Then it came into my head that I 
would amaze our friends behind by 
lighting it. Ultimately I was to discover the atrocious folly of this proceeding, but just then it came to my 
mind as an ingenious move for covering our retreat. 

"I don't know if you have ever 
thought what a rare thing in the 
absence of man and in a temperate 
climate, flames must be. The sun's 
heat is rarely strong enough to burn 
even when focussed by dewdrops, as 
is sometimes the case in more tropical 
districts. Lightning may blast and 
blacken, but it rarely gives rise to 
widespread fire. Decaying vegetation may occasionally smoulder with 
the heat of its fermentation, but this 
again rarely results in flames. Now, 



m THE DA RKNESS OF THE FORES T. 1 7 1 

in this decadent age the art of firemaking had been altogether forgotten 
on the earth. The red tongues that 
went licking up my heap of wood 
were an altogether new and strange 
thing to Weena. 

"She wanted to run to it and play 
with it. I believe she would have 
cast herself into it had I not restrained her. But I caught her up 
and in spite of her struggles plunged 
boldly before me into the wood. 
For a little way the glare of my fire 
lit the path. Looking back presently 
I could see, through the crowded tree 
stems, that from my heap of sticks 
the blaze had spread to some bushes 
adjacent, and a curved line of fire 
was creeping up the grass of the hill. 
I laughed at that. 

"Then I turned toward the dark 
trees before me again. It was very 
black and Weena clung to me convulsively, but there was still, as my 
eyes grew accustomed to the darkness, 
sufficient light for me to avoid blun


172 THE TIME MACHINE. 

dering against the stems. Overhead 
it was simply black, except when 
here and there a gap of remote blue 
sky shone down upon me. I lit 
none of my matches because I had 
no hand free. Upon my left arm I 
carried my little one, in my right hand 
I had the iron bar I had wrenched 
from the machine. 

"For some way I heard nothing 
but the crackling twigs under my feet, 
the faint rustle of the breeze above, 
and my breathing and the throb of 
the blood vessels in my ears. Then I 
seemed to hear a pattering about me. 

' I pushed on grimly. The pattering became more distinct, and then 
I heard the same queer sounds and 
voices I had heard before in the 
underworld. There were evidently 
several of the Morlocks, and they 
were closing in upon me. 
 In another minute I felt a tug at 
my coat, then something at my arm. 
Weena shivered violently and became 
quite still. 



 



IN THE DA RKNESS OF THE FORES T. 173 

"It was time for a match. But to 
get at that I must put her down. I 
did so, and immediately as I fumbled 
with my pocket a struggle began in 
the darkness about my knees, perfectly silent on her part and with the 
same peculiar cooing sounds on the 
part of the Morlocks. Soft little 
hands, too, were creeping over my coat 
and back, touching even my neck. 

"The match scratched and fizzed. 
I held it flaring, and immediately the 
white backs of the Morlocks became 
visible as they fled amid the trees. 
I hastily took a lump of camphor 
from my pocket and prepared to 
light it as soon as the match waned. 

"Then I looked at Weena. She 
was lying clutching my feet and 
quite motionless, with her face to the 
ground. With a sudden fright I 
stooped to her. She seemed scarcely 
to breathe. I lit the block of camphor and flung it to the ground, and 
as it spit and flared up and drove 
back the Morlocks and the shadows, 



174 THE TIME MACHINE. 

I knelt down and lifted up Weena. 
The wood behind seemed full of 
the stir and murmur of a great company of creatures. 

"Apparently she had fainted. I 
put her carefully upon my shoulder 
and rose to push on, and then came 
a horrible realization. 

"While maneuvering with my 
matches and Weena, I had turned 
myself about several times, and now 
I had not the faintest idea in what 
direction my path lay. For all I 
knew I might be facing back toward 
the Palace of Green Porcelain. 

"I found myself in a cold perspiration. I had to think rapidly what to 
do. I determined to build a fire and 
encamp where we were. I put the 
motionless Weena down upon a turfy 
bole. Very hastily, as my first lump 
of camphor waned, I began collecting 
sticks and leaves, 

"Here and there out of the darkness round me the eyes of the Morlocks shone like carbuncles. 



IN THE DA RKNESS OF THE FORES T. 11 S 

"Presently the camphor flickered 
and went out. I lit a match, and as 
I did so saw two white forms that 
had been approaching Weena dash 
hastily back. One was so blinded 
by the light that he came straight 
for me, and I felt his bones grind 
under the blow of my fist. He gave 
a whoop of dismay, staggered a little 
way, and fell down. 

"I lit another piece of camphor 
and went on gathering my bonfire. 
Presently I noticed how dry was 
some of the foliage above me, for 
since I had arrived on the Time 
Machine, a matter of a week, no rain 
had fallen. So instead of casting 
about among the trees for fallen 
twigs I began leaping up and dragging down branches. Very soon I 
had a choking smoky fire of green 
wood and dry sticks, and could save 
my other lumps of camphor. 

"Then I turned to where Weena lay 
beside my iron mace. I tried what 
I could to revive her, but she lay like 



176 THE TIME MACHINE. 

one dead. I could not even satisfy 
myself whether or not she breathed. 
"Now the smoke of the fire beat 
over toward me, and it must have 
made me suddenly heavy. Moreover the vapor of camphor was in 
the air. My fire would not want 
replenishing for an hour or so. I 
felt very weary after my exertion and 
sat down. The wood, too, was full 
of a slumberous murmur that I did 
not understand. 

"I seemed merely to nod and open 
my eyes. Then it was all dark 
around me, and the Morlocks had 
their hands upon me. Flinging off 
their clinging fingers I hastily felt in 
my pocket for the match-box, and  
it had gone! Then they gripped 
and closed with me again. 

"In- a moment I knew what had 
happened. I had slept, and my fire 
had gone out, and the bitterness of 
death came over my soul. The 
forest seemed full of the smell of 



IN THE DARKNESS OF THE FOREST. 1 77 

burning wood. I was caught by the 
neck, by the hair, by the arms, and 
pulled down. It was indescribably 
horrible in the darkness to feel all 
these soft creatures heaped upon me. 
I felt as if I was in a monstrous 
spider's web. I was overpowered. 
Down I went. 

"I felt some little teeth nipping 
at my neck. Abruptly I rolled over, 
and as I did so, my hand came against 
my iron lever. Somehow this gave 
me strength for another effort. I 
struggled up, shaking off these human 
rats from me, and then holding the 
bar short, I thrust where I judged 
their faces might be. I could feel 
the succulent giving of flesh and bone 
under my blows, and for a moment 
I was free. 

"The strange exultation that so 
often seems to accompany fighting 
came upon me. I knew that both I 
and Weena were lost, but I determined to make the Morlocks pay for 
their meat. I stood with my back to 



178 THE TIME MACHINE. 

a tree swinging the iron bar before 
me. The whole wood was full of the 
stir and cries of them. 

"A minute passed. Their voices 
seemed to rise to a higher pitch of 
excitement and their movements became faster. Yet none came within 
reach of me. I stood glaring at the 
blackness. Then suddenly came 
hope. 

"What if the Morlocks had no 
courage? 

"And close on the heels of that 
came a strange thing. The darkness 
seemed to grow luminous. Very 
dimly I began to see the Morlocks 
about me,  three, battered at my feet, 
 and then I perceived with incredulous surprise that the others were 
running, in an incessant stream, as 
it seemed to me, from behind me, 
and away through the wood in front 
of me. And their backs seemed no 
longer white, but reddish. 

"Then as I stood agape I saw, 
across a gap of starlight between 



IN THE DA RKNESS OF THE FORES T. 179 

the branches, a little red spark go 
drifting and vanish. And at that I 
understood the smell of burning 
wood, the slumberous murmur that 
was growing now into a gusty roaring, the red glow, and the flight of 
the Morlocks. 

"Stepping out from behind my 
tree and looking back, I saw through 
the back pillars of the nearer trees 
the flames of the burning forest. 
No' doubt it was my first fire coming 
after me. With that I hastily looked 
round for Weena, but she was gone. 
The hissing and crackling behind me, 
the explosive thud as each fresh tree 
burst into flame, left little time for 
reflection. With my iron bar still in 
hand I followed in the path of the 
Morlocks. 

"It was a close race. Once the 
flames crept forward so swiftly on my 
right as I ran, that I was outflanked 
and had to strike off to the left. But 
at last I emerged upon a small open 
place, and as I did so, a Morlock 



l8o THE TIME MACHINE. 

came blundering toward me and 
passed me, and went on straight 
into the fire. 

"And now I was to see the most 
weird and horrible scene, I think, 
of all that I beheld in that future 
age. 

"This whole space was as bright as 
day with the reflection of the fire. 
In the center was a small hillock or 
tumulus surmounted by a scorched 
hawthorn. Beyond this hill was 
another arm of the burning forest 
from which yellow tongues were 
already writhing, and completely 
encircling the space with a fence of 
fire. Upon the hillside were perhaps thirty or forty Morlocks, dazzled 
by the light and heat of the fire, 
which was now very bright and liot, 
blundering hither and thither against 
each other in their bewilderment. 
At first I did not realize their blindness, and struck furiously at them 
with my bar in a frenzy of fear as 
they approached me, killing one and 



IN THE DA RKNESS OF THE FORES T, 1 8 1 

crippling several others. But when 
I had watched the gestures of one of 
them groping under the hawthorn 
against the red sky, and heard the 
moans to which they all gave vent, I 
was assured of their absolute helplessness and refrained from striking 
any of them again. Yet every now 
and then one would come straight 
toward me, setting loose a quivering 
horror, that made me quick to elude 
him. At one time the flames died 
down somewhat, and I feared these 
foul creatures would presently be 
able to see me, and I was even thinking of beginning the fight by killing some of them before this should 
happen, but the fire burst out again 
brightly and I stayed my hand. I 
walked about the hill among them 
and avoiding them, looking for some 
trace of Weena, but I found nothing. 
"At last I sat down upon the summit of the hillock and watched this 
strange incredible company of the 
blind, groping to and fro and mak


1 82 THE TIME MACHINE. 

ing uncanny noises to one another, 
as the glare of the fire beat upon 
them. The coiling uprush of smoke 
streamed across the sky, and through 
the rare tatters of that red canopy, 
remote as though they belonged to 
another universe, shone the little 
stars. Two or three Morlocks came 
blundering into me and I drove them 
off, trembling myself as I did so, 
with blows of my fists. For the most 
of that night I was persuaded it 
was a nightmare. I bit myself and 
screamed aloud in a passionate desire to awake. I beat on the ground 
with my hands, and got up, and sat 
down again, and wandered here and 
there, and again sat down on the 
crest of the hill. Then I would fall 
to rubbing my eyes and calling upon 
God to let me awake. Thrice I saw 
Morlocks put their heads down in a 
kind of agony and rush into the 
flames. But at last, above the subsiding red of the fire, above the 
streaming masses of black smoke 



IN THE DARKNESS OF THE FOREST. 183 

and the whitening and blackening 
tree stumps, and the diminishing 
number of these dim creatures, came 
the white light of the day. 

"I searched again over the open 
space for some traces of Weena, but 
could find none, I had half feared 
to discover her mangled remains, but 
clearly they had left her poor little 
body in the forest. I cannot describe how it relieved me to think 
that it had escaped the awful fate 
to which it seemed destined. As I 
thought of that I was almost moved 
to begin a massacre of the defenseless abominations about me, but I 
contained myself. This hillock, as 
I have said, was a kind of island in 
the forest. From its summit I could 
now make out, through a haze of 
smoke, the lalace of Green Porcelain, and from that I could get my 
bearings for the white sphinx. And 
so leaving the remnant of these 
damned souls going hither and thither 
and moaning, as the day grew clearer, 



1 84 7 HE TIME MACHINE. 

I tied some grass about my feet and 
limped on across smoking ashes and 
among black stems that still pulsated 
internally with fire, toward the hiding place of the Time Machine. 

"I walked slowly, for I was almost 
exhausted as well as lame, and I felt 
the most intense wretchedness on 
account of the horrible death of little 
Weena, which then seemed an overwhelming calamity. Yet even now, 
as I tell you of it in this old familiar 
room, it seems more like the sorrow 
of a dream than an actual loss. But 
it left me absolutely lonely again that 
morning  terribly alone. I began to 
think of this house of mine, of this 
fireside, of some of you, and with 
such thoughts came a longing that 
was pain. 

"As I walked over the smoking 
ashes under the bright morning sky 
I made a discovery. In my trouser 
pocket were still some loose matches. 
The box must have leaked before it 
was lost! 




CHAPTER Xn. 

Zbc tTrap of tbe mhitc Spbinj. 

O about eight or nine in the 
morning I came to the same 
seat of yellow metal from 
which I had viewed the world upon 
the evening of my arrival. I thought 
of my hasty conclusions upon that 
evening and could not refrain from 
laughing bitterly at my confidence. 
Here was the same beautiful scene, the 
same abundant foliage, the same splendid palaces and magnificent ruins, the 
same silver river running between its 
fertile banks. The gay robes of the 
beautiful people moved hither and 
thither among the trees. Some were 
bathing in exactly the place where I 
had saved Weena, and that suddenly 
gave me a keen stab of pain. And 
like blots upon the landscape rose 
185 



1 86 THE TIME MACHINE. 

the cupolas above the ways to the 
underworld. I understood now what 
all the beauty of the overworld 
people covered. Very pleasant was 
their day, as pleasant as the day of 
the cattle in the field. Like the cattle 
they knew of no enemies, and provided against no needs. And their 
end was the same. 

" I grieved to think how brief the 
dream of the human intellect had 
been. It had committed suicide. It 
had set itself steadfastly toward comfort and ease, a balanced society with 
 security and permanence as its watchwords, it had attained its hopes  to 
come to this at last. Once, life and 
property must have reached almost 

\ absolute safety. The rich had been 
assured of his wealth and comfort, 

' the toiler assured of his life and work. 
No doubt in that perfect world there 
had been no unemployed problem, 
no social question left unsolved. 
And a great quiet had followed. 
"It is a law of nature we overlook, 



THE TRAP OF THE WHITE SPHINX. 1 87 

that intellectual versatility is the 
compensation for change, danger, 
and trouble. An animal perfectly 
in harmony with its environment is 
a perfect mechanism. Nature never 
appeals to intelligence until habit 
and instinct are useless. There is no 
intelligence where there is no change 
and no need of change. Only those 
animals partake of intelligence that 
have to meet a huge variety of needs 
and dangers. 

" So, as I see it, the upperworld man 
had drifted toward his feeble prettiness, and the underworld to mere 
mechanical industry. But that perfect 
state had lacked one thing even of 
mechanical perfection  absolute permanency. Apparently as time went 
on the feeding of the underworld, 
however it was effected, had become 
disjointed. Alother Necessity, who 
had been staved off for a few thousand years, came back again, and she 
began below. The underworld, being 
in contact with machinery which, 






1 88 THE TIME MACHINE. 

however perfect, still needs some little 
thought outside of habit, had probably retained, perforce, rather more 
initiative, if less of every other human 
character, than the upper. And when 
other meat failed them, they turned 
to what old habit had hitherto forbidden. So I say I saw it in my last 
view of the world of 810,701. It may 
be as wrong an explanation as mortal 
wit could invent. It is how the 
thing shaped itself to me, and as 
\ that I give it to you. 
" " After the fatigues, excitements, 
and terrors of the past days, and in 
spite of my grief, this seat and the 
tranquil view and the warm sunlight 
were very pleasant. I was very tired 
and sleepy, and soon my theorizing 
passed into dozing. Catching myself at that I took my own hint, and 
spreading myself out upon the turf, 
I had a long and refreshing sleep. 

" I awoke a little before sunsetting. I now felt safe against being 
caught napping by the Morlocks, and 



THE TRAP OP THE WHITE SPHINX. 1 89 

Stretching myself I came on down the 
hill toward the white sphinx. I had 
my crowbar in one hand, and the 
other played with the matches in my 
pocket. 

" And now came a most unexpected thing. As I approached the 
pedestal of the sphinx I found the 
bronze panels were open. They had 
slid down into grooves. 

" At that I stopped short before 
them, hesitating to enter. 
 Within was a small apartment, 
and on a raised place in the corner 
of this was the Time Machine. I 
had the small levers in my pocket. 
So here, after all my elaborate preparations for the siege of the white 
sphinx, was a meek surrender. I 
threw my iron bar away, almost sorry 
not to use it. 

"A sudden thought came into my 
head as I stooped toward the portal. 
For once at least I grasped the mental operations of the Morlocks. Suppressing a strong inclination to laugh, 



t<y> THE TIME MACHINE. 

I stepped through the bronze frame 
and up to the Time Machine. I was 
surprised to find it had been carefully oiled and cleaned. I have suspected since that the Morlocks had 
even partially taken it to pieces while 
trying in their dim way to grasp its 
purpose. 
 Now, as I stood and examined 
it, finding a pleasure in the mere 
touch of the contrivance, the thing 
I had expected happened. The 
bronze panels suddenly slid up and 
struck the frame with a clang. I 
was in the dark  trapped. So the 
Morlocks thought. At that I 
chuckled gleefully. 

'' I could already hear their murmuring laughter as they came toward me. Very calmly I tried to 
strike the match. I had only to fix 
on the levers and depart then like a 
ghost. But I had overlooked one 
little thing. The matches were of 
that abominable kind that light only 
on the box. 



THE TRAP OF THE WHITE SPHINX. 19! 

"You may imagine how all my 
calm vanished. The little brutes 
were close upon me. One touched 
me. I made a sweeping blow in the 
dark at them with the lever, and began to scramble into the saddle of 
the Machine. Then came one hand 
upon me and then another. 

 Then I had simply to fight against 
their persistent fingers for my levers, 
and at the same time feel for the 
studs over which these fitted. One, 
indeed, they almost got away from 
me. As it slipped from my hand 
I had to butt in the dark with my 
lead I could hear the Morlock's 
skull ring  to recover it. It was a 
nearer thing than the fight in the 
forest, I think, this last scramble. 

" But at last the lever was fixed 
and . pulled over. The clinging 
hands slipped from me. The darkness presently fell from my eyes. 
I found myself in the same gray 
light and tumult I have already 
described. 




CHAPTER XIII. 

XLbc jFurtbec Disiom 

HAVE already told you of 
the sickness and confusion 
that comes with time traveling. And this time I was not seated 
properly in the saddle, but sideways 
and in an unstable fashion. For an 
indefinite time I clung to the machine 
as it swayed and vibrated, quite 
unheeding how I went, and when I 
brought myself to look at the dials 
again I was amazed to find where I 
had arrived. One dial records days, 
another thousands of days, another 
millions of days, and another thousands of millions. Now instead of 
reversing the levers I had pulled 
them over so as to go forward with 
them, and when I came to look at 
these indicators I found that the 
192 



THE FURTHER VISION. 193 

thousands hand was sweeping round 
as fast as the seconds hand of a 
watch, into futurity. 

"Very cautiously, for I remembered my former headlong fall, I began to reverse my motion. Slower 
and slower went the circling hands, 
until the thousands one seemed motionless and the daily one was no 
longer a mere mist upon its scale. 
Still slower, until the gray haze 
around me became distincter, and dim 
outlines of a low hill and a sea became visible. 

"But as my motion became slower 
there was, I found, no blinking 
change of day and night. A steady 
twilight brooded over the earth. 
And the band of light that had indicated the sun had, I now noticed, 
become fainter, had faded indeed to 
invisibility in the east, and in the 
west was increasingly broader and 
redder. The circling of the stars 
growing slower and slower had given 
place to creeping points of light. At 



194 THE TIME MACHINE. 

last, some time before I stopped, the 
sun, red and very large, halted 
motionless upon the horizon, a vast 
dome glowing with a dull heat. The 
work of the tidal drag was accomplished. . The earth had come to rest 
with one face to the sun even as in 
our own time the moon faces the 
earth. 
 ' I stopped very gently and sat upon 
the Time Machine looking round me. 

"The sky was no longer blue. 
Northeastward it was inky black, and 
out of the blackness shone brightly 
and steadily the pale white stars. 
Overhead it was a deep Indian red, 
and starless, and southeastward it 
grew brighter to where, cut by the 
horizon, lay the motionless hull of 
the huge red sun. 

"The rocks about me were of a 
harsh reddish color, and all the trace 
of life that I could see at first was 
the intensely green vegetation that 
covered every projecting point on its 
southeastern side. It was the same 



THE FURTHER VISION. 195 

i-ich green that one sees on forest 
moss or on the lichen in caves, plants 
which, like these, grow in a perpetual 
twilight. 

"The Machine was standing on a 
sloping beach. The sea stretched 
away to the southwest to rise into 
a sharp bright horizon against the 
wan sky. There were no breakers 
and no waves, for not a breath of 
wind was stirring. Only a slight oily 
swell rose and fell like a gentle 
breathing, and showed that the 
eternal sea was still moving and living. And along the margin where 
the water sometimes broke was a 
thick incrustation of salt  pink under 
the lurid sky. 

"There was a sense of oppression 
in my head and I noticed that I was 
breathing very fast. The sensations 
remind me of my only experience 
of mountaineering, and from that I 
judged the air was more rarified than 
it is now. 

"Far away up the desolate slope I 



196 THE TIME MACHINE. 

heard a harsh scream, and saw a 
thing like a huge white butterfly go 
slanting and fluttering up into the 
sky and, circling, disappear over some 
low hillocks beyond. 

"The sound of its voice was so 
dismal that I shivered, and seated 
myself more firmly upon the Machine. 

"Looking round me I saw that, 
quite near to me, what I had taken to 
be a reddish mass of rock was moving slowly toward me. Then I saw 
the thing was really a monstrous 
crab-like creature. Can you imagine 
a crab as large as yonder table, with 
its numerous legs moving slowly and 
uncertainly, its big claws swaying, its 
long antennae like carters' whips, 
waving and feeling, and its stalked 
eyes gleaming at you on either side 
of its metallic front? Its back was 
corrugated and ornamented with ungainly bosses, and a greenish incrustation blotched it here and there. I 
could see the numerous palps of its 



THE FURTHER VISION. 197 

complicated mouth flickering and 
feeling as it approached. 

"As I stared at this sinister apparition crawling toward me, I felt a 
tickling on my cheeks as though a fly 
had alighted there. 

"I tried to brush it away with my 
hand, but in a moment it returned, 
and almost immediately after another 
came near my ear. I struck at this 
and caught something threadlike. It 
was drawn swiftly out of my hand. 
With a frightful qualm I turned and 
saw I had grasped the antennae of 
another monster crab that stood immediately behind me. Its evil eyes 
were wriggling on their stalks, its 
mouth was all alive with appetite, 
and its vast ungainly claws, smeared 
with green slime, were descending 
upon me. 

"In a moment my hand was on the 
lever of the Time Machine, and I 
had place a month between myself 
and these monsters. But I found I 
was still on the same beach and I saw 



igS THE TIME MACHINE. 

them distinctly now as soon as I 
stopped. Dozens of them seemed to 
be crawling here and there in the 
somber light among the foliated 
sheets of intense green. 

"I cannot convey the sense of 
abominable desolation that hung over 
the world. The red eastern sky, the 
northward blackness, the salt Dead 
Sea, the stony beach crawling with 
these foul, slow-stirring monsters, the 
uniform, poisonous-looking green of 
the lichenous plants, the thin air that 
hurt one's lungs; all contributed to 
an appalling effect. 

"I moved on a hundred years, and 
there was the same red sun, the same 
dying sea, the same chill air, and 
the same crowd of earthly Crustacea 
creeping in and out among the green 
weed and the red rocks. 

"So I traveled, stopping ever and 
again, in great strides of a thousand 
years or more, drawn on by the mystery of the earth's fate, tracing with 
a strange fascination how the sun was 



THE FURTHER VISION. 1 99 

growing larger and duller in the westward sky, and the life of the old 
earth ebbing out. At last, more than 
thirty million years hence, the huge 
red-hot dome of the sun had come to 
obscure nearly a sixth part of the 
darkling heavens. Then it was I 
stopped, for the crawling multitude 
of crabs had disappeared, and the red 
beach, save for its livid green liverworts and lichens, seemed lifeless 
again. 

"As soon as I stopped a bitter cold 
assailed me. The air felt keenly 
cold, and rare white flakes ever and 
again came eddying down. To the 
northeastward the glare of snow lay 
under the starlight of the sable sky, 
and I could see an undulating crest 
of pinkish white hillocks. There 
were fringes of ice along the sea margin, drifting masses further out, but 
the main expanse of that salt ocean, 
all bloody under the eternal sunset, 
was still unfrozen. 

"I looked about me to see if any 



20O THE TIME MACHINE. 

traces of animals remained. A certain indefinable apprehension still 
kept me in the saddle of the Machine. 
I saw nothing moving, on earth or 
sky or sea. The green slime on the 
rocks alone testified that life was not 
extinct. A shallow sandbank had 
appeared in the sea and the water 
had receded from the beach. I 
fancied I saw some black object flopping about upon this bank, but it 
became motionless as I looked at it, 
and I judged my eye had been deceived and that the object was merely 
a rock. The stars in the sky were 
intensely bright and seemed to me to 
twinkle very little. 

"Suddenly I noticed that the circular outline, westward, of the sun had 
changed, that a concavity, a bay, had 
appeared in the curve. I saw this 
grow larger. For a minute, perhaps, 
I stared aghast at this blackness that 
was creeping over the day, and then I 
realized that an eclipse was beginning. No doubt, now that the moon 



THE FURTHER VISION. 20I 

was creeping ever nearer to the earth, 
and the earth to the sun, eclipses 
were of frequent occurrence. 

"The darkness grew apace, a cold 
wind began to blow in freshening 
gusts from the east, and then the 
white flakes that were falling out of 
the air increased. The tide was 
creeping in with a ripple and a 
whisper. Beyond these lifeless 
sounds the world was silent  silent! 
It would be hard to convey to you 
the stillness of it. All the sounds of 
man, the bleating of sheep, the cries 
of birds, the hum of insects, the stir 
that makes the background of our 
lives, were over. As the darkness 
thickened the eddying flakes became 
more abundant, dancing before my 
eyes; and the cold of the air more 
intense. At last, swiftly, one after 
the other, the white peaks of the distant hills vanished into blackness. 
The breeze grew to a moaning wind. 
I sa.w the black central shadow of 
the eclipse sweeping toward me. In 



202 THE TIME MACHINE. 

another moment the pale stars alone 
were visible. All else was rayless obscurity. The sky was absolutely black. 

"A horror of this great darkness 
came upon me. The cold that smote 
to my marrow, and the pain I felt in 
breathing, overcame me. I shivered 
and a deadly nausea seized me. 
Then like a red-hot bow in the sky 
appeared the edge of the sun. 

"I got off the Machine to recover 
myself. I felt giddy and incapable 
of facing the return journey. As I 
stood sick and confused I saw again 
the moving thing upon the shoal  
there was no mistake now that it was 
a moving thing  against the red 
water of the sea. It was a round 
thing, of the size of a football perhaps, or bigger; it seemed black 
against the weltering blood-red water, 
and it was hopping fitfully about. 
Then I felt I was fainting. A terrible dread of lying helpless in that 
remote twilight sustained me while I 
clambered upon the saddle. 



THE FURTHER VISION. 203 
'SoI camehome. For a long time 
I must have been insensible upon 
the Machine. The blinking succession of the days and nights was 
resumed, the sun grew golden again, 
the sky blue. I breathed with 
greater freedom. The fluctuating 
contours of the land ebbed and 
flowed. The hands spun backward 
upon the dials. At last I saw again 
the dim shadows of homes, the evidences of decadent humanity. 
These, too, changed and passed, and 
others came. Presently when the 
millions dial was at zero I slackened 
speed, and began to recognize our 
own pretty and familiar architecture. The thousands hand ran back 
to the starting point, the night and 
day flapped slower and slower. 
Then the old walls of the laboratory came round me. Very gently 
now I diminished the pace of the 
mechanism. 

"I saw one little thing that seemed 
odd to me. I think I have told you 



204 THE TIME MACHINE. 

that when I set out, before my velocity became very high, Mrs. Watchett 
had walked across the room, traveling, as it seemed to me, like a rocket. 
As I returned I passed again across 
that minute when she traversed the 
laboratory. But now every motion 
appeared to be the exact inversion of 
her previous one. The door at the 
lower end opened and she glided 
quietly up the laboratory, back foremost, and disappeared behind the 
door by which she had previously 
entered. 

"Then I stopped the Machine, and 
saw about me again the old familiar 
laboratory, my tools, my appliances, 
just as I had left them. I got off 
the thing very shakily and sat down 
upon my bench. For several minutes 
I trembled violently. Then I became calmer. Around me was my 
old workshop again, exactly as it had 
been. I might have slept there and 
the whole thing have been a dream. 

"And yet not exactly. The thing 



THE FURTHER VISION. 205 

had started from the southeast corner 
of the laboratory. It had come to 
rest again in the northwest, against 
the wall, where you will find it. That 
gives you the exact distance from 
my little lawn to the pedestal of the 
white sphinx. 

"For a time my brain became stagnant. Presently I got up and came 
through the passage here, limping, 
because my heel was still painful, and 
feeling sorely begrimed. I saw the 
Fall Mall Gazette on the table by 
the door. I found the date was indeed to-day, and looking at the timepiece, saw the hour was almost eight 
o'clock. I heard your voices and 
the clatter of plates. I hesitated  
I felt so sick and weak. Then I 
sniffed good wholesome meat, and 
opened the door. You know the 
rest. I washed and dined, and now 
I am telling you the story. 

"I know," he said after a while, 
"that all this will be absolutely in


206 THE TIME MACHINE. 

credible to you, but to me the one 
incredible thing is that I am here tonight in this old familiar room, looking into your wholesome faces, and 
telling you all these strange adventures." 

He looked at the Medical Man. 

"No; I cannot expect you to 
believe it. Take it as a lie, or a 
prophecy. Say I dreamed it in the 
workshop. Consider I have been 
speculating upon the destinies of our 
race, until I have hatched this fiction. 
Treat my assertion of its truth as a 
mere stroke of art to enhance its interest. And taking it as a story, 
what do you think of it?" 

He took up his pipe and began in 
his old accustomed manner to tap 
upon the bars of the grate. 



CHAPTER XIV. 
Btter the Zimc traveler's Stor. 




HERE was a momentary 
stillness. Then chairs began to creak and shoes to 
scrape upon the carpet. I took my 
eyes off the Time Traveler's face 
and looked round at his audience. 
They were in the dark and little spots 
of color swam before them. The 
Medical Man seemed absorbed in 
the contemplation of our host. The 
Editor was looking hard at the end 
of his cigar  the sixth. The Journalist fumbled for his watch. The 
others as far as I remember were 
motionless. 

The Editor stood up with a sigh. 
"What a pity it is you're not a 
writer of stories!" he said, putting 
207 



208 THE TIME MACHINE. 

his hand on the Time Traveler's 
shoulder. 

"You don't believe it?" 

"Well " 

"I thought not." The Time Traveler turned round to us. "Where 
are the matches?" he said. He lit 
one and spoke over his pipe, puffing, 
"To tell you all the truth I hardly 
believe it myself  and yet " 

His eyes fell with a mute inquiry 
upon the withered white flowers upon 
the little table. Then he turned over 
the hand holding his pipe, and I saw 
he was looking at some half healed 
scars on his knuckles. 

The Medical Man rose, came 
to the lamp, and examined the 
flowers. "The gynoecium's odd," 
he said. 

The Psychologist leaned forward 
to see, holding out his hand for a 
specimen. 

"I'm hanged if it isn't a quarter 
to one," said the Journalist. "How 
shall we get home?" 



AFTER THE STORY. 20 

"Plenty of cabs at the station," 
said the Psychologist. 

"It's a curious thing," said the 
Medical Man; "but I certainly don't 
know the natural order of these 
flowers. May I have them?" 

The Time Traveler hesitated. 
Then suddenly, "Certainly not." 

"Where did you really get them?" 
said the Medical Man. 

The Time Traveler put his hand 
to his head. He spoke like one who 
was trying to keep hold of an idea 
that eluded him. "They were put 
into my pocket by Weena when I 
traveled into Time." He stared 

round the room. "I'm d d if it 

isn't all going. This room and you 
and the atmosphere of everyday is 
too much for my memory. Did I 
ever make a Time Machine, or a 
model of a Time Machine, or is it 
all only a dream? They say life is 
a dream, a precious poor dream at 
times  but I can't stand another 
that won't fit. It's madness. And 



2IO THE TIME MACHINE. 

where did the dream come from? I 
must look at that Machine. If there 
is one." 

He caught up the lamp swiftly and 
carried it flaring redly through the 
door into the corridor. 

We followed him. 

There in the flickering light of the 
lamp was the Machine, sure enough, 
squat, ugly, and askew, a thing of 
brass, ebony, ivory, and translucent, 
glimmering quartz. Solid to the 
touch  for I put out my hand and 
felt the rail of it  and with brown 
spots and smears upon the ivory, 
and bits of grass and moss upon 
the lower parts, and one rail bent 
awry. 

The Time Traveler put the lamp 
down on the bench, and ran his hand 
along the broken rail. 

"It's all right now," he said. 
"The story I told you was true. 
I'm sorry to have brought you out 
here  in the cold." 

He took up the lamp, and in an 



A FTER THE S TOR Y. 211 

absolute silence we returned to the 
smoking room. 

The Time Traveler came into the 
hall with us and helped the Editor 
on with his coat. The Medical Man 
looked into our host's face and, with 
a certain hesitation, told him he was 
suffering from overwork, at which 
he laughed hugely. I remember 
him standing in the open doorway 
bawling good-night. 

I shared a cab with the Editor. 
He thought the tale a "gaudy lie." 
For my own part I was unable to 
come to any conclusion about the 
matter. The story was so fantastic 
and incredible, the telling so credible 
and sober. I lay awake most of the 
night thinking about it. I determined to go next day and see the 
Time Traveler again. 

I was told he was in the laboratory, 
and being on easy terms in the house 
I went up to him. The laboratory, 
however, was empty. I stared for 
a minute at the Time Machine and 



212 THE TIME MACHINE. 

put out my hand and touched a 
lever. At that the squat, substantiallooking mass swayed like a bough 
shaken by the wind. Its instability 
startled me extremely, and I had a 
queer reminiscence of childish days 
when I used to be forbidden to 
meddle. I came back through the 
corridor. The Time Traveler met 
me in the smoking room. He was 
coming from the house. He had a 
small camera under one arm and a 
knapsack under the other. He 
laughed when he saw me and gave 
me an elbow to shake. 

"I'm frightfully busy," he said; 
"with that thing in there." 

"But is it not some hoax?" said 
I. "Do you really travel through 
Time?" 

"Really and truly I do." And he 
looked frankly into my eyes. 

He hesitated. His eye wandered 
round the room. "I only want half 
an hour," he said. "I know why 
you came, and it's awfully good of 



AFTER THE STORY. 213 

you. There's some magazines here. 
If you'll stop to lunch I'll prove this 
time traveling to you up to the hilt. 
Specimens and all. If you'll forgive 
my leaving you now?" 

I consented, hardly comprehending then the full import of his 
words, and he nodded and went on 
down the corridor, I heard the 
door of the laboratory slam, seated 
myself in a chair, and took up the 
New Review. What was he going to 
do before lunch time? Then suddenly I was reminded by an advertisement that I had promised to meet 
Richardson the publisher at two. 
I looked at my watch, and saw I 
could barely save that engagement. 
I got up and went down the passage 
to tell the Time Traveler. 

As I took hold of the handle of 
the door I heard an exclamation 
oddly truncated at the end, and a 
click and a thud. A gust of air 
whirled round me as I opened the 
door, and from within came the 



214 THE TIME MACHINE. 

sound of broken glass falling on the 
floor. The Time Traveler was not 
there. I seemed to see a ghostly 
indistinct figure sitting in a whirling 
mass of black and brass for a 
moment, a figure so transparent that 
the bench behind with its sheets of 
drawings was absolutely distinct; 
but this phantasm I immediately 
perceived was illusory. The Time 
Machine had gone. Save for a subsiding stir of dust the central space 
of the laboratory was empty. A 
pane of the skylight had apparently 
just been blown in. 

I felt an unreasonable amazement. 
I knew that something strange had 
happened, and for a moment could 
not distinguish what the strange thing 
might be. As I stood staring, the 
door into the garden opened, and 
the man-servant appeared. 

We looked at each other. Then 
ideas began to come. 

"Has Mr. gone out that 

way?" said I. 



AFTER THE STORY. 21$ 

"No, sir. No one has come out 
this way. I was expecting to find 
him here." 

At that I understood. At the 
risk of disappointing Richardson I 
remained waiting for the Time 
Traveler, waiting for the second, 
perhaps still stranger, story, and the 
specimens and photographs he would 
bring with him. 

But I am beginning to fear now 
that I must wait a lifetime for that. 
The Time Traveler vanished three 
years ago. Up to the present he has 
not returned, and when he does 
return he will find his home in the 
hands of strangers and his little 
gathering of auditors broken up forever. Filby has exchanged poetry 
for playwriting, and is a rich man  as 
literary men go  and extremely unpopular. The Medical Man is dead, 
the Journalist is in India, and the 
Psychologist has succumbed to paralysis. Some of the other men I 
used to meet there have dropped as 



2l6 THE TIME MACHINE. 

completely out of existence as if they, 
too, had traveled off upon some similar anachronisms. And so, ending 
in a kind of dead wall, the story of 
the Time Machine must remain for 
the present at least. 



THE END. 


Book: FRANKENSTEIN: 

OR,

THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 

" Did I request thee, Maker, from my clay, 
To mould me man ? Did I solicit thee 
From darkness to promote me? "  Paradise Lost. 

O PREFACE. 

source of amusement, and partly as an expedient for exercising any untried resources of mind. Other motives were 
mingled with these, as the work proceeded. I am by no 
means indifferent to the manner in which whatever moral 
tendencies exist in the sentiments or characters it contains 
shall affect the reader ; yet my chief concern in this respect 
has been limited to the avoiding the enervating effects of the 
novels of the present day, and to the exhibition of the amiableness of domestic affection, and the excellence of universal virtue. The opinions which naturally spring from the 
character and situation of the hero are by no means to be 
conceived as existing always in my own conviction ; nor is 
any inference justly to be drawn from the following pages as 
prejudicing any philosophical doctrine of whatever kind. 

It is a subject also of additional interest to the author, that 
this story was begun in the majestic region where the scene 
is principally laid, and in society which cannot cease to be 
regretted. I passed the summer of 1816 in the environs of 
Geneva. The season was cold and rainy, and in the evenings we crowded around a blazing wood fire, and occasionally amused ourselves with some German stories of ghosts, 
which happened to fall into our Jiands. These tales excited 
in us a playful desire of imitation. Two other friends (a 
tale from the pen of one of whom would be far more acceptable to the public than any thing I can ever hope to produce) and myself agreed to write each a story, founded on 
some supernatural occurrence. 

The weather, however, suddenly became serene ; and my 
two friends left me on a journey among the Alps, and lost, 
in the magnificent scenes which they present, all memory of 
their ghostly visions. The following tale is the only one 
which has been completed. 



PREFACE TO THE LAST LONDON EDITION. 



THE Publishers of the Standard Novels, in selecting 
''Frankenstein" for one of their series, expressed a 
wish that I should furnish them with some account of the 
origin of the story. I am the more willing to comply because I shall thus give a general answer to the question so 
very frequently asked me, " How I, then a young girl, came 
to think of and to dilate upon so very hideous an idea ? ' 
It is true that I am very averse to bringing myself forward 
in print ; but as my account will only appear as an appendage to a former production, and as it will be confined to 
such topics as have connection with my authorship alone, I 
can scarcely accuse myself of a personal intrusion. 

It is not singular, that, as the daughter of two persons of 
distinguished literary celebrity, I should very early in life 
have thought of writing. As a child, I scribbled ; and my 
favorite pastime, during the hours given me for recreation, 
was '' to write stories." Still I had a dearer pleasure than 
this, which was the formation of castles in the air ; the indulging in waking dreams ; the following up trains of 
thought, which had for their subject the formation of a succession of imaginary incidents. My dreams were at once 
more fantastic and agreeable than my writings. In the latter I was a close imitator,  rather doing as others had done 
than putting down the suggestions of my own mind. What 
I wrote was intended at least for one other eye,  my childhood's companion and friend ; but my dreams were all my 



8 PREFACE. 

own ; I accounted for them to nobody ; they were my refuge 
when annoyed, my dearest pleasure when free. 

I lived principally in the country as a girl, and passed a 
considerable time in Scotland. I made occasional visits to 
the more picturesque parts ; but my habitual residence was 
on the blank and dreary northern shores of the Tay, near 
Dundee. Blank and dreary, on retrospection, I call them ; 
they were not so to me then. They were the eyry of freedom, and the pleasant region where unheeded I could commune with the creatures of my fancy. I wrote then, but in 
a most commonplace style. It was beneath the trees of the 
grounds belonging to our house, or on the bleak sides of 
the woodless mountains near, that my true compositions, 
the airy flights of my imagination, were born and fostered. 
I did not make myself the heroine of my tales. Life appeared to me too commonplace an affair as regarded myself. 
I could not figure to myself that romantic woes or wonderful 
events would ever be my lot ; but I was not confined to my 
own identity, and I could people the hours with creations 
far more interesting to me, at that age, than my own sensations. 

After this, my life became busier, and reality stood in 
place of fiction. My husband, however, was from the first 
very anxious that I should prove myself worthy of my parentage, and enroll myself on the page of fame. He was for 
ever inciting me to obtain literary reputation, which, even on 
my own part, I cared for then, though since I have become 
infinitely indifferent to it. At this time he desired that I 
should write, not so much with the idea that I could produce 
any thing worthy of notice, but that he might himself judge 
how far I possessed the promise of better things hereafter. 
Still I did nothing. Travelling, and the cares of a family, 
occupied my time ; and study, in the way of reading, or 
improving my ideas in communication with his far more 
cultivated mind, was all of literary employment that engaged 
my attention. 



PREFACE. 9 

In the summer of 1816, we visited Switzerland, and became the neighbors of Lord Byron. At first we spent our 
pleasant hours on the lake, or wandering on its shores ; and 
Lord Byron, who was writing his third canto of ' Childe 
Harold,' was the only one among us who put his thoughts 
upon paper. These, as he brought them successively to us, 
clothed in all the light and harmony of poetry, seemed to 
stamp as divine the glories of heaven and earth, whose influences we partook with him. 

But it proved a wet, ungenial summer, and incessant rain 
often confined us for days to the house. Some volumes of 
ghost stories, translated from the German and French, fell 
into our hands. There was the History of the Inconstant 
Lover, who, when he thought to clasp the bride to whom he 
had pledged his vows, found himself in the arms of the pale 
ghost of her whom he had deserted. There was the tale of 
the sinful founder of his race, whose miserable doom it \yas 
to bestow the kiss of death on all the younger sons of his illfated house, just when they reached the age of promise. 
His gigantic, shadowy form, clothed like the ghost in Hamlet, in complete armor, but with the beaver up, was seen at 
midnight by the moons fitful beams, to advance slowly 
along the gloomy avenue. The shape was lost beneath the 
shadow of the castle walls ; but soon a gate swung back, a 
step was heard, the door of the chamber opened, and he 
advanced to the couch of the blooming youths, cradled in 
healthy sleep. Eternal sorrow sat upon his face as he bent 
down and kissed the forehead of the boys, who from that 
hour withered like flowers snapped upon the stalk. I have 
not seen these stories since then ; but their incidents are as 
fresh in my mind as if I had read them yesterday. 

''We will each write a ghost story," said Lord Byron; 
and his proposition was acceded to. There were four of us. 
The noble author began a tale, a fragment of which he 
printed at the end of his poem of ''Mazeppa." Shelley, more 
apt to embody ideas and sentiments in the radiance of bril


lO PREFACE. 

liant imagery, and in the music of the most melodious verse 
that adorns our language, than to invent the machinery of a 
story, commenced one founded on the experiences of his 
early life. Poor Polidori had some terribie idea about a 
skull-headed lady, who was so punished for peeping through 
a key-hole  what to see I forget  something very shocking and wrong, of course : but when she was reduced to a 
worse condition than the renowned Tom of Coventry, he 
did not know what to do with her, and was obliged to despatch her to the tomb of the Capulets, the only place for 
which she was fitted. The illustrious poets, also annoyed 
by the platitude of prose, speedily relinquished their uncongenial task. 

I busied myself to tJii7ik of a story  a story to rival 
those which had excited us to this task. One which would 
speak to the mysterious fears of our nature, and awaking 
thrilling horror  one to make the reader dread to look 
round, to curdle the blood, and quicken the beatings of the 
heart. If I did not accomplish these things, my ghost story 
would be unworthy of its name. I thought and pondered 
 vainly. I felt that blank incapability of invention which 
is the greatest misery of authorship, when dull Nothing replies to our anxious invocations. Have you thoiight of a 
story? I was asked each morning, and each morning I was 
forced to reply with a mortifying negative. 

Every thing must have a beginning, to speak in Sanchean 
phrase ; and that beginning must be linked to something 
that went before. The Hindoos give the elephant a world 
to support it, but they make an elephant to stand upon a 
tortoise. Invention, it must be humbly admitted, does not 
exist in creating out of void, but out of chaos ; the materials 
must, in the first place, be afforded : it can give form to dark, 
shapeless substances, but cannot bring into being the substance itself. In all matters of discovery and invention, even 
of those that appertain to the imagination, we are continually reminded of the story of Columbus and his . In


PREFACE. II 

vention consists in the capacity of seizing on the capabilities 
of a subject, and in the power of moulding and fashioning 
ideas suggested to it. 

Many and long were the conversations between Lord Byron and Shelley, to which I was a devout but nearly silent 
listener. During one of these, various philosophical doctrines were discussed, and among others, the nature of the 
principle of life, and whether there was any probability of 
its ever being discovered and communicated. They talked 
of the experiments of Dr. Darwin (I speak not of what the 
Doctor really did, or said he did, but, as more to my purpose, of what was then spoken of as having been done by 
him), who preseived a piece of vermicelli in a glass cage, 
till by some extraordinary means it began to move with voluntary motion. Not thus, after all, would life be given. 
Perhaps a corpse would be re-animated ; galvanism had 
given token of such things ; perhaps the component parts 
of a creature might be manufactured, brought together, and 
endued with vital warmth. 

Night waned upon this talk, and even the witching hour 
had gone by, before we retired to rest. When I had placed my 
head on my pillow, I did not sleep, nor could I be said to think. 
My imagination, unbidden, possessed and guided me, gifting 
the successive images that arose in my mind with a vividness far beyond the usual bound of reverie. I saw  with 
shut eyes, but acute mental vision  I saw the pale student 
of unhallowed arts kneeling beside the thing he had put 
together. I saw the hideous phantasm of a man stretched 
out, and then, on the working of some powerful engine, 
show signs of life, and stir with an uneasy, half-vital motion. 
Frightful must it be ; for supremely frightful would be the 
effect of any human endeavor to mock the stupendous mechanism of the Creator of the world. His success would 
terrify the artist ; he would rush away from his odious 
handiwork, horror-stricken. He would hope that, left to 
itself, the slight spark of life which he had communicated, 



12 PREFACE. 

would fade ; that this thing which had received such imperfect animation, would subside into dead matter ; and he 
might sleep in the belief that the silence of the grave would 
quench for ever the transient existence of the hideous corpse 
which he had looked upon as the cradle of life. He sleeps : 
but he is awakened ; he opens his eyes : behold the horrid 
thing stands at his bedside, opening his curtains, and looking 
on him with yellow, watery, but speculative eyes. 

I opened mine in terror. The idea so possessed my mind, 
that a thrill of fear ran through me and I wished to exchange 
the ghastly image of my fancy for the realities around. I 
see them still ; the very room, the dark parquet the closed 
shutters, with the moonlight struggling through, and the 
sense I had that the glassy lake and white high Alps were 
beyond. I coUld not so easily get rid of my hideous phantom ; still it haunted me. I must try to think of something 
else. I recurred to my ghost story  my tiresome, unlucky 
ghost story ! Oh, if I could only contrive one which would 
frighten my reader as I myself had been frightened that 
night ! 

Swift as light, and as cheering, was the idea that broke in 
upon me. ' I have found it ! What terrified me will terrify others ; and I need only describe the spectre which had 
haunted my midnight pillow. ' On the morrow I announced 
that I had thought of a story. I began that day with the 
words. It was on a dreary night hi November. making 
only a transcript of the grim terrors of my w;aking dream. 

At first I thought but of a few pages  of a short tale ; 
but Shelley urged me to develop the idea at greater length. 
I certainly did not owe the suggestion of one incident, nor 
scarcely of one train of feeling, to my husband, and yet, but 
for his incitement, it would never have taken the form in 
which it was presented to the world. From this declaration I must except the preface. As far as I can recollect, it 
was entirely written by him. 

And now, once again, I bid my hideous progeny go forth 



PREFACE. 13 

and prosper. I have an affection for it, for it was the offspring of happy days, when death and grief were but words, 
which found no true echo in my heart. Its several pages 
speak of many a walk, many a drive, and many a conversation, when I was not alone ; and my companion was one 
who, in this world, I shall never see more. But this is for 
myself; my readers have nothing to do with these associations. 



FRANKENSTEIN; 

OR, 

THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 



LETTER I. 

TO MRS. SAVILLE, ENGLAND. 

St. Petersburg, Dec. nth, 17  . 
"XT'OU will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the 
- commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with 
such evil forebodings. I arrived here yesterday; and my first task 
is to assure my dear sister of my welfare, and increasing confidence 
in the success of my undertaking. 

I am already far north of London ; and as I walk in the streets 
of Petersburg, I feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, 
which braces my nerves, and fills me with delight. Do you understand this feeling? This breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards which I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those 
icy climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my day dreams 
become more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that 
the pole is the seat of frost and desolation ; it ever presents itself 
to my imagination as the region of beauty and delight. There, 
Margaret, the sun is for ever visible ; its broad disk just skirting 
the horizon, and diffusing a perpetual splendor. There  for with 
your leave, my sister, I will put some trust in preceding navigators 
 there snow and frost are banished ; and, sailing over a calm sea, 
we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in beauty 
every region hitherto discovered on the habitable globe. Its productions and features may be without example, as the phenomena 
of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered 
solitudes. What may not be expected in a country of eternal 
light? I may there discover the wondrous power which attracts 
the needle; and may regulate a thousand celestial observations, 
that require only this voyage to render their seeming eccentricities 



1 6 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

consistent for ever. I shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the 
sight of a part of the world never before visited, and may tread a 
land never before imprinted by the foot of man. These are my 
enticements, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of danger 
or death, and to induce me to commence this laborious voyage 
with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little boat, with 
his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native 
river. But, supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot 
contest the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all mankind 
to the last generation, by discovering a passage near the pole to 
those countries, to reach which at present so many months are 
requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at 
all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine. 

These reflections have dispelled the agitation with which I began 
my letter, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which 
elevates me to Heaven ; for nothing contributes so much to tranquillize the mind as a steady purpose  a point on which the soul 
may fix its intellectual eye. This expedition has been the favorite 
dream of my early years. I have read with ardor the accounts of 
the various voyages which have been made in the prospect of 
arriving at the North Pacific Ocean through the seas which surround the pole. You may remember, that a history of all the 
voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of our 
good Uncle Thomas's library. My education was neglected, yet I 
was passionately fond of reading. These volumes were my study 
day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret 
which I had felt, as a child, on learning that my father's dying 
injunction had forbidden my uncle to allow me to embark in a seafaring life. 

These visions faded when I perused, for the first time, those 
poets whose effusions entranced my soul, and lifted it to Heaven. 
I also became a poet, and for one year lived in a Paradise of my 
own creation ; I imagined that I also might obtain a niche in the 
temple where the names of Homer and Shakspeare are consecrated. 
You are well acquainted with my failure, and how heavily I bore 
the disappointment. But just at that time I inherited the fortune 
of my cousin, and my thoughts were turned into the channel of 
their earlier bent. 

Six years have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking. 
I can, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself 
to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 1 7 

the North Sea; T voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want 
of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during 
the day, and devoted my nights to the study of mathematics, the 
theory of medicine, and those branches of physical science from 
which a naval adventurer might derive the greatest practical advantage. Twice I actually hired myself as an undermate in a Greenland whaler, and acquitted mj'self to admiration. I must own I 
felt a little proud, when my captain offered me the second dignity 
in the vessel, and entreated me to remain with the greatest earnestness ; so valuable did he consider my services. 

And now, dear Margaret, do I not deserve to accomplish some 
great purpose? My life might have been passed in ease and luxury; but I .preferred glory to every enticement that wealth placed 
in my path. Oh that some encouraging voice would answer in 
the affirmative ! My courage and my resolution is firm ; but my 
hopes fluctuate, and my spirits' are often depressed. I am about to 
proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which 
will demand all my fortitude : I am required not only to raise the 
spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are 
failing. 

This is the most favorable period for travelling in Russia. They 
fly quickly over the snow in their sledges ; the motion is pleasant, 
and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an English 
stage-coach. The cold is not excessive, if you are wrapt in furs, a 
dress which I have already adopted ; for there is a great diflerence 
between walking the deck and remaining seated motionless for 
hours, when no exercise prevents the blood from actually freezing 
in 3our veins. I have no ambition to lose my life on the post-road 
between St. Petersburg and Archangel. 

I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; 
and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done 
by paying the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many 
sailors as I think necessary among those who are accustomed to 
the whale-fishing. I do not intend to sail until the month of June : 
and when shall I return? Ah, dear sister, how can I answer this 
question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will 
pass before you and I may meet. If I fail, you will see me again 
soon, or never. 

Farewell, my dear, excellent Margaret. Heaven shower down 
blessings on you, and save me, that I may again and again testify 
my gratitude for all your love and kindness. 

Your affectionate brother, R- Walton. 



1 8 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 



LETTER II. 



TO MRS. SAVILLE, ENGLAND. 



Archangel, 28th March, 17. 

How slowly the time passes here, encompassed as I am bj frost 
and snow; yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise. I 
liave hired a vessel, and am occupied in collecting my sailors; 
those whom I have already engaged appear to be men on whom I 
can depend, and are certainly possessed of dauntless courage. 

But I have one want which I have never yet been able to satisfy; 
and the absence of the object of which I now feel as a most severe 
evil. I have no friend, Margaret : when I am glowing with the 
enthusiasm of success, there will be none to participate my joy; if 
I am assailed by disappointment, no one will endeavor to sustain 
me in dejection.- I shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; 
but that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling. I 
desire the company of a man who could sympathize with me; 
whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my 
dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a friend. I have no one 
near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as 
of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my own, to approve or 
amend my plans. How would such a friend repair the faults of 
your poor brother! I am too ardent in execution, and too impatient of difficulties. But it is a still greater evil to me that I am 
self-educated ; for the first fourteen years of my life I ran wild on a 
common, and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas's books of 
voyages. At that age I became acquainted with the celebrated 
f)oets of our own country; but it was only when it had ceased to be 
in my power to derive its most important benefits from such a conviction, that I perceived the necessity of becoming acquainted with 
more languages than that of my native country. Now I am twentyeight, and am in reality more illiterate than many school-boys of 
fifteen. It is true that I have thought more, and that my day 
dreams are more extended and magnificent; but they want (as the 
painters call it) keeping; and I greatly need a friend who would 
have sense enough not to despise me as romantic, and aftection 
enough for me to endeavor to regulate my mind. 

Well, these are useless complaints ; I shall certainly find no 
friend on the wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 



19 



merchants and seamen. Yet some feelings, unallied to the dross 
of human nature, beat even in these rugged bosoms. My lieutenant, 
for instance, is a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is 
madly desirous of glory. He is an Englishman, and in the midst 
of national and professional prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, 
retains some of the noblest endowments of humanity. I first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel : finding that he 
was unemployed in this city, I easily engaged him to assist in my 
enterprise. 

The master is a person of an excellent disposition, and is remarkable in the ship for his gentleness, and the mildness of his discipline. He is, indeed, of so amiable a nature that he will not hunt 
(a favorite, and almost the only amusement here), because he cannot endure to spill blood. He is, moreover, heroically generous. 
Some years ago he loved a young Russian lady, of moderate fortune ; 
and having amassed a considerable sum in prize-money, the father 
of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once more 
before the destined ceremony; but she was bathed in tears, and, 
throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her, confessing 
at the same time that she loved another, but that he was poor, and 
that her father would never consent to the union. My generous 
friend re-assured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name 
of her lover, instantly abandoned his pursuit. He had already 
bought a farm with his money, on which he had designed to pass 
the remainder of his life; but he bestowed the whole on his rival, 
together with the remains of his prize-money, to purchase stock, 
and then himself solicited the young woman's father to consent to 
her marriage with her lover. But the old man decidedly refused, 
thinking himself bound in honor to my friend ; who, when he 
found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until 
he heard that his former mistress was married according to her 
inclinations. ''What a noble fellow!" you will exclaim. He is 
so; but then he has passed all his life on board a vessel, and has 
scarcely an idea beyond the rope and the shroud. 

But do not suppose that, because I complain a little, or because 
I can conceive a consolation for my toils which I may never know, 
that I am wavering in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate; 
and my voyage is now only delayed until the weather shall permit 
my embarkation. The winter has been dreadfully severe; but the 
spring promises well, and it is considered as a remarkably early 
season; so that, perhaps, I may sail sooner than I expected. I 
shall do nothing rashly; you know me sufficiently to confide in my 



20 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

prudence and considerateness whenever the safety of others is committed to my care. 

I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of 
my undertaking. It is impossible to communicate to you a conception of the trembling sensation, half fearful, with which I am 
preparing to depart. I am going to unexplored regions, to 'the 
land of mist and snow; " but I shall kill no albatross, therefore do 
not be alarmed for my safety. 

Shall I meet you again, after having traversed immense seas, 
and returned by the most southern cape of Africa or America? I 
dare not expect such success, yet I cannot bear to look on the 
reverse of the picture. Continue to write to me by every opportunity : I may receive your letters (though the chance is very 
doubtful) on some occasions when I need them most to support my 
spirits. I love you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, 
should you never hear from me again. 

Your affectionate brother, 

Robert Walton. 



LETTER III. 

TO MRS. SAVILLE, ENGLAND. 

July 7th, 17. 

My dear Sister,  I write you a few lines in haste, to say that 
I am safe, and well advanced on my voyage. This letter will reach 
England by a merchantman now on its homeward voyage from 
Archangel ; more fortunate than I, who may not see my native 
land, perhaps, for many years. I am, however, in good spirits : 
my men are bold, and apparently firm of purpose; nor do the floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers of 
the region toward which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. 
We have already reached a very high latitude ; but it is the height 
of summer, and although not so warm as England, the southern 
gales, which blow us speedily toward those shores which I so 
ardently desire to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth 
which I had not expected. 

No incidents have hitherto befallen us, that would make a figure 
in a letter. One or two stiff gales, and the breaking of a mast, are 
accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to re


THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 21 

cord ; and I shall be well content, if nothing worse happens to us 
during our voyage. 

Adieu, my dear Margaret. Be assured that, for my own sake, as 
well as yours, I will not rashly encounter danger. I will be cool, 
persevering, and prudent. 

Remember me to all my English friends. 

Most affectionately yours, R. W. 



LETTER IV. 

TO MRS. SAVILLE, ENGLAND. 

August 5th, 17  . 

So strange an accident has happened to us, that I cannot forbear 
recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before these papers can come into your possession. 

Last Monday (July 31st,) we were nearly surrounded by ice, 
which closed in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the searoom in which she floated. Our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. 
We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place 
in the atmosphere and weather. 

About two o'clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched 
out in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which 
seemed to have no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my 
own mind began to grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when a 
strange sight suddenly attracted our attention, and diverted our 
solicitude from our own situation. We perceived a low carriage, 
fixed on a sledge and drawn by dogs, pass on towards the north, at 
the distance of half a mile : a being which had the shape of a man, 
but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the sledge, and guided the 
dogs. We watched the rapid progress of the traveller with our telescopes, until he was lost among the distant inequalities of the ice. 

This appearance excited our unqualified wonder. We were, as 
we believed, many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that it was not, in reality, so distant as we 
had supposed. Shut in, however, by ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the greatest attention. 

About two hours after this occurrence, we heard the ground sea; 



Z2 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

and before night the ice broke, and freed our ship. We, however, 
lay to until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those 
large loose masses which float about after the breaking up of the 
ice. I profited of this time to rest for a few hours. 

In the morning, however, as soon as it was light, I went upon 
deck, and found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, 
apparently talking to some one in the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge, 
like that we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the 
night, on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; 
but there was a human being within it, whom the sailors were 
persuading to enter the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller 
seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but 
an European. When I appeared on deck, the master said, '' Here 
is our captain, and he will not alJow you to perish on the open 
sea." 

On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. '' Before I come on board your 
vessel," said he,' will you have the kindness to inform me whither 
you are bound ? " 

You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question 
addressed to me from a man on the brink of destruction, and to 
whom I should have supposed that my vessel would have been a 
resource which he would not have exchanged for the most precious 
wealth the earth can afford. I replied, however, that we were on 
a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole. 

Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied, and consented to come 
on board. Good God ! Margaret, if you had seen the man who 
thus capitulated for his safety, your surprise would have been 
boundless. His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully 
emaciated by fatigue and suffering. I never saw a man in so 
wretched a condition. We attempted to carry him into the cabin, 
but as soon as he had quitted the fresh air, he fainted. We accordingly brought him back to the deck, and restored him to animation 
by rubbing him with brandy, and forcing him to swallow a small 
quantity. As soon as he showed signs of life, we wrapped him up 
in blankets, and placed him near the chimney of the kitchen-stove. 
By slow degrees he recovered, and ate a little soup, which restored 
him wonderfully. 

Two days passed in this manner before he was able to speak; 
and I often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of his 
understanding. When he had in some measure recovered, I removed him to my own cabin, and attended on him as much as my 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 23 

duty would permit. I never saw a more interesting creature : his 
eyes have generally an expression of wildness, and even madness; 
but there are moments when, if any one performs an act of kindness towards him, or does him any the most trifling service, his 
whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with a beam of benevolence and sweetness that I never saw equalled. But he is general! v 
melancholy and despairing; and sometimes he gnashes his teeth, as 
if impatient of the weight of woes that oppress him. 

When my guest was a little recovered, I had great trouble to 
keep oflf the men, who wished to ask him a thousand questions; 
but I would not allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, 
in a state of body and mind whose restoration evidently depended 
upon entire repose. Once, however, the lieutenant asked, Why he 
had come so far upon the ice in so strange a vehicle. 

His countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest 
gloom; and he replied, ''To seek one who fled from me." 

"And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?" 
"Yes." 

"Then I fancy we have seen him; for, the day before we picked 
you up, we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, 
across the ice." 

This aroused the stranger's attention ; and he asked a multitude 
of questions concerning the route which the demon, as he called 
him, had pursued. Soon after, when he was alone with me, he 
said, "I have, doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of 
these good people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries." 
"Certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman 
in me to trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine." 

"And yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation ; 
you have benevolently restored me to life." 

Soon after this he inquired, if I thought that the breaking up of 
the ice had destroyed the other sledge. I replied, that I could uui 
answer with any degree of certainty; for the ice had not broken 
until near midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at a place 
of safety before that time ; but of this I could not judge. 

From this time the stranger seemed very eager to be upon deck, 
to watch for the sledge which had before appeared ; but I have 
persuaded him to remain in the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere. And I have promised that 
some one should watch for him, and give him instant notice if any 
new object should appear in sight. 



24 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up 
to the present day. The stranger has gradually improved in health, 
but is very silent, and appears uneasy when any one except myself 
enters his cabin. Yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle, 
that the sailors are all interested in him, although they have 
very little communication with him. For my own part, I begin to 
love him as a brother; and his constant and deep grief fills me 
with sympathy and compassion. He must have been a noble 
creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive 
and amiable. 

I said in one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I should find 
no friend on the wide ocean; yet I have found a man who, before 
his spirit had been broken by misery, I should have been happy to 
have possessed as the brother of my heart. 

I shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals, 
should I have any fresh incidents to record. 

August 13th, 37  . 

My affection for my guest increases every day. He excites at 
once my admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. How 
can I see so noble a creature destroyed by misery, without feeling 
the most poignant grief? He is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is 
so cultivated ; and when he speaks, although his words are culled 
with the choicest art, yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled 
eloquence. 

He is now much recovered from his illness, and is continually on 
deck, apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. 
Yet, although unhappy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own 
misery, but that he interests himself deeply in the employments of 
others. He has asked me many questions concerning my design; 
and I have related my little history frankly to him. He appeared 
pleased with the confidence, and suggested several alterations in 
my plan, which I shall find exceedingly useful. There is no 
pedantry in his manner; but all he does appears to spring solely 
from the interest he instinctively takes in the welfare of those who 
surround him. He is often overcome by gloom, and then he sits 
by himself, and tries to overcome all that is sullen or unsocial in 
his humor. These paroxysms pass from him like a cloud from 
before the sun, though his dejection never leaves him. I have 
endeavored to win his confidence; and I trust that I have succeeded. One day I mentioned to him the desire I had always felt 
of finding a friend who might sympathize with me, and direct me 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 25 

Tdj his counsel. I said I did not belong to that class of men who 
are offended by advice. I am self-educated, and perhaps I hardly 
rely sufficiently upon my own powers. I wish therefore that my 
companion should be wiser and more experienced than myself, to 
confirm and support me ; nor have I believed it impossible to find 
a true friend. 

''I agree with you," replied the stranger, "in believing that 
friendship is not only a desirable, but a possible, acquisition. I 
once had a friend, the most noble of human creatures, and am 
entitled, therefore, to judge respecting friendship. You have hope 
and the world before you, and have no cause for despair. But I  
I have lost every thing, and cannot begin life anew." 

As he said this, his countenance became expressive of a calm 
settled grief, which touched me to the heart. But he was silent, 
and presently retired to his cabin. 

Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than 
he does the beauties of nature. The starry sky, the sea, and every 
sight afiorded by these wonderful regions, seem still to have the 
power of elevating his soul from earth. Such a man has a double 
existence : he may suffer misery, and be overwhelmed by disappointments ; yet when he has retired into himself, he will be like a 
celestial spirit, that has a halo around him, within whose circle no 
grief or folly ventures. 

Will you laugh at the enthusiasm I express concerning this 
divine wanderer? If you do, you must certainly have lost that 
simplicity which was once your characteristic charm. Yet, if you 
will, smile at the warmth of my expressions, while I find every day 
new causes for repeating them. 

August 19th, 17  . 
Yesterday the stranger said to me, 'You may easily perceive, 
Captain Walton, that I have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes. I had determined, once, that the memory of these evils 
should die with me; but you have won me to alter my determination. You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did; and I 
ardently hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be a 
serpent to sting you, as mine has been to me. I do not know that 
the relation of my misfortunes will be useful to you, yet, if you are 
inclined, listen to my tale. I believe that the strange incidents 
connected with it will aff'ord a view of nature, which may enlarge 
your faculties and understanding. You will hear of powers and 
occurrences, such as you have been accustomed to think impossible; 



26 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 

but I do not doubt that my tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed." 

You may easily conceive that I vvas much gratified by the offered 
communication ; yet I could not endure that he should renew his 
grief by a recital of his misfortunes. I felt the greatest eagerness 
to hear the promised narrative, partly from curiosity, and partly 
from a strong desire to ameliorate his fate, if it were in my power. 
I expressed these feelings in my answer. 

" I thank you," he replied, " for your snnpathy, but it is useless ; 
my fate is nearly fulfilled. I wait for but one event, and then I 
shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling," continued he, 
perceiving that I wished to interrupt him; "but you are mistaken, 
my friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; nothing can 
alter my destiny. Listen to my history, and you will perceive how 
irrevocably it is determined." 

He then told me, that he would commence his narrative the next 
day, when I should be at leisure. This promise drew from me the 
warmest thanks. I have resolved every night to record, as nearly 
as possible in his own words, what he has related during the day. 
If I should be engaged, I will at least make notes. This manuscript 
will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure ; but to me, who 
know him, and who hear it from his own lips, with what interest 
and sympathy shall I read it at some future day! 



FRANKENSTEIN; 

OR, 

THE MODERN PROMETHEUS 



CHAPTER I. 



T AM by birth a Genevese; and my family is one of the most dis-- tinguished of that republic. My ancestors had been for many 
years counsellors and syndics; and my father had filled several 
public situations with honor and reputation. He was respected by 
all who knew him, for his integrity and indefatigable attention to 
public business. He passed his younger days perpetually occupied 
by the affairs of his country; and it was not until the decline of life 
that he thought of marrying, and bestowing on the state sons who 
might carry his virtues and his name down to posterity. 

As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, I 
cannot refrain from relating them. One of his most intimate 
friends was a merchant who, from a flourishing state, fell, through 
numerous mischances, into poverty. This man, whose name was 
Beaufort, was of a proud and unbending disposition, and could not 
bear to live in poverty and oblivion in the same country where he 
had formerly been distinguished for his rank and magnificence. 
Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most honorable manner, he 
retreated with his daughter to the town of Lucerne, where he lived 
unknown and in wretchedness. My father loved Beaufort with the 
truest friendship, and was deeply grieved by his retreat in these 
unfortunate circumstances. He grieved also for the loss of his 
society, and resolved to seek him out and endeavor to persuade him 
to begin the world again through his credit and assistance. 

Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself; and it 
was ten months before my father discovered his abode. Overjoyed 
t this discovery, he hastened to the house, which was situated in a 
mean street, near the Reuss. But when he entered, misery and 



28 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

despair alone welcomed him. Beaufort had saved but a very small 
sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes ; but it was sufficient 
to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in the mean 
time he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchant's house. The interval was consequently spent in inaction. 
His grief only became more deep and rankling, when he had leisure 
for reflection; and at length it took so fast hold of his mind, that 
at the end of three months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable 
of any exertion. 

His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness ; but she 
saw with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing, and 
that there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould ; and her courage 
rose to support her in her adversity. She procured plain work; 
she plaited straw; and by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life. 

Several months passed in this manner. Her father grew worse; 
her time was more entirely occupied in attending him ; her means 
of subsistence decreased; and in the tenth month her father died 
in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. This last blow 
overcame her; and she was kneeling by Beaufort's coffin, when my 
father entered the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the 
poor girl, who committed herself to his care, and after the interment of his friend he conducted her to Geneva, and placed her 
under the protection of a relation. Two years after this event, 
Caroline became his wife. 

When my father became a husband and a parent, he found his 
time so occupied by the duties of his new situation, that he relinquished many of his public employments, and devoted himself to 
the education of his children. Of these I was the eldest, and the 
destined successor to all his labors and utility. No creature could 
have more tender parents than mine. My improvement and health 
were their constant care, especially as I remained for several years 
their only child. But before I continue my narrative, I must record 
an incident which took place when I was four years of age. 

My father had a sister, whom he tenderly loved, and who had 
married early in life an Italian gentleman. Soon after her marriage, she had accompanied her husband into his native country, 
and for some years my father had very little communication with 
her. About the time I mentioned she died; and a few months 
afterwards he received a letter from her husband, acquainting him 
with his intention of marrying an Italian lady, and requesting ray 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 29 

father to take charge of the infant Elizabeth, the only child of his 
deceased sister. ''It is my wish," he said, ''that you should consider her as your own daughter, and educate her thus. Her mother's fortune is secured to her, the documents of which I will commit 
to your keeping. Reflect upon this proposition, and decide whether 
you would prefer educating your niece yourself, to her being 
brought up by a stepmother." 

My father did not hesitate, and immediately went to Italy, that he 
might accompany the little Elizabeth to her future home. I have 
often heard my mother say, that she was at that time the most 
beautiful child she had ever seen, and showed signs even then, of a 
gentle and affectionate disposition. These indications, and a desire to bind as closely as possible the ties of domestic love, determined my mother to consider Elizabeth as my future wife ; a design 
which she never found reason to repent. 

From this time Elizabeth Lavenza became my playfellow, and, as 
we grew older, my friend. She was docile and good tempered, yet 
gay and playful as a summer insect. Although she was lively and 
animated, her feelings were strong and deep, and her disposition 
uncommonly affectionate. No one could better enjoy liberty, yet 
no one could submit with more grace than she did to constraint and 
caprice. Her imagination was luxuriant, yet her capability of application was great. Her person was the image of her mind; her 
hazel eyes, although as lively as a bird's, possessed an attractive 
softness. Her figure was light and airy; and though capable of 
enduring great fatigue, she appeared the most fragile creature in 
the world. While I admired her understanding and fan  I loved 
to tend on her, as I should on a favorite animal ; and I never saw 
so much grace both of person and mind united to so little pretension. 

Every one adored Elizabeth. If the servants had any request to 
make, it was always through her intercession. We were strangers 
to any species of disunion or dispute ; for, although there was a 
great dissimilitude in our characters, there was a harmony in that 
very dissimilitude. I was more calm and philosophical than my 
companion ; yet my temper was not so yielding. My application 
was of longer endurance ; but it was not so severe while it endured. 
I delighted in investigating facts relative to the actual world ; she 
busied herself in following the aerial creation of the poets. The 
world was to me a secret which I desired to discover; to her it was 
a vacancy which she sought to people with imaginations of her 
own. 



30 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

Mj brothers were considerably younger than myself, but I had a 
friend in one of my school-fellows, who compensated for this deficiency. Henry Clerval was the son of a merchant of Geneva, an 
intimate friend of my father. He was a boy of singular talent and 
fancy. I remember, when he was nine years old, he wrote a fairy 
tale, which was the delight and amazement of all his companions. 
His favorite study consisted in books of chivalry and romance ; and 
when very young, I can remember, that we used to act plays composed by him out of these favorite books, the principal characters 
of which were Orlando, Robin Hood, Amadis, and St. George. 

No youth could have passed more happily than mine. My parents were indulgent, and my companions amiable. Our studies 
were never forced ; and by some means we always had an end 
placed in view, which excited us to ardor in the prosecution of 
them. It was by this method, and not by emulation, that we were 
urged to application. Elizabeth was not incited to apply herself to 
drawing, that her companions might not outstrip her; but through 
the desire of pleasing her aunt by the representation of some favorite scene done by her own hand. We learned Latin and English, 
that we might read the writings of those languages ; and so far 
from study being made odious to us by punishment, we loved application, and our amusements have been the labors of other children. 
Perhaps we did not read so many books, or learn languages so 
quickly, as those who are disciplined according to the ordinary 
methods ; but what we learned was impressed the more deeply on 
our memories. 

In this description of our domestic circle I include Henry Clerval, 
for he was almost constantly with us. He went to school with me, 
and generally passed the afternoon at our house; for being an only 
child, and destitute of companions at home, his father was well 
pleased that he should find associates at our house; and we were 
never completely happy when Clerval was absent. 

I feel pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind, and changed its bright visions 
of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon 
self. But, in drawing the picture of my early days, I must not omit 
to record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after 
tale of misery; for when I would account to myself for the birth of 
that passion, which afterwards ruled my destiny, I find it arose, like 
a mountain river, from ignoble and almost forgotten sources; but, 
swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its course, 
has swept away all my hopes and joys. 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 3I 

Natural Philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; I 
desire, therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to 
my predilection for that science. When I was thirteen years of 
age, we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon : 
the inclemency of the weather obliged us to remain a day confined 
to the inn. In this house I chanced to find a volume of the works 
of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with apathy ; the theory which 
he attempts to demonstrate, and the wonderful facts which he 
relates, soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light 
seemed to dawn upon my mind; and, bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father. I cannot help remarking 
here the many opportunities instructors possess of directing the 
attention of their pupils to useful knowledge, which they utterly 
neglect. My father looked carelessly at the titlepage of my book, 
and said, " Ah ! Cornelius Agrippa ! My dear Victor, do not waste 
your time upon this : it is sad trash ! " 

If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me, that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely 
exploded, and that a modern system of science had been introduced, 
which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because 
the powers of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former 
were real and practical; under such circumstances, I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside, and, with my imagination 
warmed as it was, should probably have applied myself to the 
more rational theory of chemistry which has resulted from modern 
discoveries. It is even possible, that the train of my ideas would 
never have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. But the 
cursory glance my father had taken of my volume by no means 
assured me that he was acquainted with its contents; and I continued to read with the greatest avidity. 

When I returned home, my first care was to procure the whole 
works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus 
Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with 
delight; they appeared to me treasures known to few beside myself; and although I often wished to communicate these secret 
stores of knowledge to my father, yet his indefinite censure of my 
favorite Agrippa always withheld me. I disclosed my discoveries 
to Elizabeth, therefore, under a promise of strict secrecy; but she 
did not interest herself in the subject, and I was left by her to 
pursue my studies alone. 

It may appear very strange that a disciple of Albertus Magnus 
should arise in the eighteenth century; but our family was not 



32 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

scientifical, and I had not attended any of the lectures given at the 
public schools of Geneva. My dreams were therefore undisturbed 
by reality; and I entered vith the greatest diligence into the search 
for the philosopher's stone and the elixir of life. But the latter 
obtained my most undivided attention : wealth was an inferior 
object; but what glory would attend the discovery, if I could 
banish disease from the human frame, and render man invulnerable 
to any but a violent death ! 

Nor were these my only visions. The raising of ghosts or devils 
was a promise liberally accorded by my favorite authors, the fulfilment of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations 
were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my 
own inexperience and mistake, than to a want of skill or fidelity 
in my instructors.' 

The natural phenomena that take place every day before our eyes 
did not escape my examination. Distillation, and the wonderful 
eftects of steam, processes of which my favorite authors were 
utterly ignorant, excited my astonishment; but my utmost wonder 
was engaged by some experiments on an air-pump, which I saw 
employed by a gentleman whom we were in the habit of visiting. 

The ignorance of the early philosophers on these and several 
other points served to decrease their credit with me ; but I could 
not entirely" throw them aside, before some other sjstem should 
occupy their place in my mind. 

When I was about fifteen jears old, we had retired to our house 
near Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunder-storm. It advanced from behind the mountains of Jura; and 
the thunder burst at once with frightful loudness from various 
quarters of the heavens. I remained, while the storm lasted, 
watching its progress with curiosity and delight. As I stood at the 
door, on a sudden I beheld a stream of fire issue from an old and 
beautiful oak, which stood about twenty yards from our house; 
and so soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, 
and nothing remained but a blasted stump. When we visited it 
the next morning, we found the tree shattered in a singular manner. It was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced to 
thin ribands of wood. I never beheld any thing so utterly destroyed. 

The catastrophe of this tree excited my extreme astonishment ; 
and I eagerly inquired of my father the nature and origin of thunder 
and lightning. He replied' Electricity ; " describing at the same 
time the various eftects of that power. He constructed a small 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 33 

electrical machine, and exhibited a few experiments; he made also 
a kite, with a wire and spring, which drew down that fluid from 
the clouds. 

This last stroke completed the overthrow of Cornelius Agrippa 
Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, who had so long reigned the 
lords of my imagination. But by some fatality I did not feel 
inclined to commence the study of any modern system ; and this 
disinclination was influenced by the following circumstance :  

My father expressed a wish that I should attend a course of 
lectures upon natural philosophy, to which I cheerfully consented. 
Some accident prevented my attending these lectures until the 
course was nearly finished. The lecture being therefore one of the 
last, was entirely incomprehensible to me. The professor discoursed 
with the greatest fluency of potassium and boron, of sulphates and 
oxyds, terms to which I could aflix no idea; and I became disgusted with the science of natural philosophy, although I still read 
Pliny and Buftbn with delight, authors, in my estimation, of nearly 
equal interest and utility. 

My occupations at this age were principally the mathematics, 
and most of the branchy of study appertaining to that science. 
I was busily employed in learning languages ; Latin was already 
familiar to me, and I began to read some of the easiest Greek 
authors without the help of a lexicon. I also perfectly understood 
English and German. This is the list of my accomplishments at 
the age of seventeen ; and you may conceive that my hours were 
fully employed in acquiring and maintaining a knowledge of this 
various literature. 

Another task also devolved upon me, when I became the instructor of my brothers. Ernest was six years younger than myself, and was my principal pupil. He had been afllicted with ill 
health from his infancy, through which Elizabeth and I had been 
his constant nurses : his disposition was gentle, but he was incapable of any severe application. William, the youngest of our 
family was yet an infant, and the most beautiful little fellow in the 
world; his lively blue eyes, dimpled cheeks, and endearing manners inspired the tenderest affection. 

Such was our domestic circle, from which care and pain seemed 
forever banished. My father directed our studies, and my mother 
partook of our enjoyments. Neither of us possessed the slightest 
pre-eminence over the other; the voice of command was never 
heard among us ; but mutual affection engaged us all to comply 
with and obey the slightest desire of each other. 

3 



34 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 



CHAPTER 11. 

WHEN I had attained the age of seventeen, my parents resolved 
that I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. 
I had hitherto attended the schools of Geneva; but my father 
thought it necessary, for the completion of my education, that I 
should be made acquainted with other customs than those of my 
native country. My departure was therefore fixed at an early date; 
but before the day resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune 
of my life occurred  an omen, as it were, of my future misery. 

Elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever ; but her illness was not 
severe, and she quickly recovered. During her confinement, many 
arguments had been urged to persuade my mother to refrain from 
attending upon her. She had, at first, yielded to our entreaties; 
but when she heard that her favorite was recovering, she could no 
longer debar herself from her society, and entered her chamber 
long before the danger of infection was past. The consequences of 
this imprudence were fatal. On the thi day my mother sickened ; 
her fever was very malignant, and the looks of her attendants 
prognosticated the worst event. On her death-bed the fortitude 
and benignity of this admirable woman did not desert her. She 
joined the hands of Elizabeth and myself: ''My children," she 
said, '' my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the 
prospect of your union. This expectation will now be the consolation of your father. Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place 
to your younger cousins. Alas ! I regret that I am taken from you ; 
and, happy and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you 
all. But these are not thoughts befitting me: I will endeavor to 
resign myself cheerfully to death, and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world." 

She died calmly; and her countenance expressed affection even 
in death. I need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest 
ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents 
itself to the soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. It is so long before the mind can persuade itself that she 
whom we saw every day, and whose very existence appeared a part 
of our own, can have departed forever, tliat the brightness of a 
beloved eye can have been extinguished, and the sound of a voice 
so familiar and dear to the ear can be hushed never more to be 
heard. These are the reflections of the first days; but when the 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 35 

lapse of time proves the reality of the evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. Yet from whom has not that rude hand 
rent away some dear connection ; and why should I describe a 
sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? The time at length 
arrives, when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity; and 
the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a 
sacrilege, is not banished. My mother was dead, but we had still 
duties which we ought to perform ; we must continue our course 
with the rest, and learn to think ourselves fortunate, while one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. 

My journey to Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these 
events, was now again determined upon. I obtained from my 
father a respite of some weeks. This period was spent sadly; my 
mother's death, and my speedy departure, depressed our spirits ; but 
Elizabeth endeavored to renew the spirit of cheerfulness in our little 
society. Since the death of her aunt, her mind had acquired new 
firmness and vigor. She determined to fulfil her duties with the 
greatest exactness ; and she felt that the most imperious duty, of 
rendering her uncle and cousins happy, had devolved upon her. 
She consoled me, amused her uncle, instructed my brothers ; and I 
never beheld her so enchanting as at this time, when she was 
continually endeavoring to contribute to the happiness of others, 
entirely forgetful of herself. 

The day of my departure at length arrived. I had taken leave 
of all my friends excepting Clerval, who had spent the last evening 
with us. He bitterly lamented that he was unable to accompany 
me ; but his father could not be persuaded to part with him, intending that he should become a partner with him in business, in 
compliance with his favorite theory, that learning was superfluous 
in the commerce of ordinary life. Henry had a refined mind; he 
had no desire to be idle, and was well pleased to become his father's 
partner; but he believed that a man might be a very good trader, 
and yet possess a cultivated understanding. 

We sat late, listening to his complaints, and making many little 
arrangements for the future. The next morning early I departed. 
Tears gushed from the eyes of Elizabeth ; they proceeded partly 
from sorrow at my departure, and partly because she reflected that 
the same journey was to have taken place three months before, 
when a mother's blessing would have accompanied me. 

I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away, and 
indulged in the most melancholy reflections. I, who had ever 
been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in 



36 FRANKENSTEIN, OR, 

endeavoring to bestow mutual pleasure, I was now alone. In the 
university whither I was going, I must form my own friends, and 
be my own protector. My life had hitherto been remarkably 
secluded and domestic; and this had given me invincible repugnance to new countenances. I loved my brothers, Elizabeth, 
and Clerval; these were ''old familiar faces ;" but I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of strangers. Such were my 
reflections as I commenced my journey ; but as I proceeded, my 
spirits and hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain 
during my youth cooped up in one place, and had longed to enter 
the world, and take my station among other human beings. Now 
my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been 
folly to repent. 

I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections dur-, 
ing my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At 
length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I alighted, 
and was conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening 
as I pleased. 

The next morning I delivered my letters of introduction, and 
paid a visit to some of the principal professors, and among others 
to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy. He received me 
with politeness, and asked me several questions concerning my 
progress in the different branches of science appertaining to 
natural philosophy. I mentioned, it is true, with fear and trembling, the only authors I had ever read upon those subjects. The 
professor stared: "Have you," he said, ''really spent your time in 
studying such nonsense.'" 

I replied in the affirmative. "Every minute," continued M. 
Krempe with warmth, " every instant that you have wasted on 
those books is utterly and entirelj lost. You have burdened your 
memory with exploded systems, and useless names. Good God ! 
in what desert land have you lived, where no one was kind enough 
to inform you that these fancies, which you have so greedily 
imbibed, are a thousand years old, and as musty as they are 
ancient. I little expected in this enlightened and scientific age to 
find a disciple of Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear sir, 
you must begin your studies entirely anew." 

So saying, he stepped aside, and wrote down a list of several books 
treating of natural philosophy, which he desired me to procure, 
and dismissed me, after mentioning that in the beginning of the 
following week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 3 

natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman, 
a fellow-professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days 
that he missed. 

I returned home, not disappointed, for I had long considered 
those authors useless whom the profes.sor had so strongly reprobated ; but I did not feel much inclined to study the books which I 
procured at his recommendation. M. Krempe was a little squat 
man, with a gruif voice and repulsive countenance; the teacher, 
therefore, did not prepossess me in favor of his doctrine. Besides, 
I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy. It 
was very different, when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; 
but now the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer 
seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of those visions on which 
my interest in science was chiefly founded. I was required to 
exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little 
worth. 

Such were my reflections during the first two or three days spent 
almost in solitude. But as the ensuing week commenced, I thought 
of the information which M. Krempe had given me concerning the 
lectures. And although I could not consent to go and hear that 
little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected 
what he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had never seen, as he 
had hitherto been out of town. 

Partly from curiosity, and partly from idleness, I went into the 
lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This 
professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty 
years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence ; a few gray hairs covered his temples, but those at the back 
of his head were nearly black. His person was short, but remarkably erect; and his voice the sweetest I had ever heard. He began 
his lecture by a recapitulation of the history of chemistry and the 
various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing with fervor the names of the most distinguished discoverers. He then took a cursory view of the present state of the 
science, and explained many of its elementary terms. After having 
made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric 
upon modern chemistry, the terms of which I shall never forget. 

'' The ancient teachers of this science," said he, ' promised impossibilities, and performed nothing. The modern masters promise 
very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted, and that 
the elixir of life is a chimera. But these philosophers, whose hands 



38 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the 
microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They 
penetrate into the recesses of nature, and show how she works in 
her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we 
breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers ; 
they can command the thunders of the heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows." 

I departed highly pleased with the professor and his lecture, and 
paid him a visit the same evening. His manners in private were 
even more mild and attractive than in public ; for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture, which in his own house 
was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. He heard 
with attention my little narration concerning my studies, and 
smiled at the names of Cornelius Agrippa, and Paracelsus, but 
without the contempt that M. Krempe had exhibited. He said, that 
'' these were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers 
were indebted for most of the foundations of their knowledge. 
They had left us an easier task, to give new names, and arrange in 
connected classifications, the facts which they in a great degree had 
been the instruments of bringing to light. The labors of men of 
genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately 
turning to the solid advantage of mankind." I listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption or affectation; 
and then added, that his lecture had removed my prejudices against 
modern chemists ; and I at the same time requested his advice 
concerning the books I ought to procure. 

'I am happy," said M. Waldman, ' to have gained a disciple; 
and if your application equals your ability, I have no doubt of your 
success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which 
the greatest improvements have been made, and may be made ; it is 
on that account that I have made it my peculiar study; but at the 
same time I have not neglected other branches of science. A man 
would make but a very sorry chemist, if he attended to that department of human knowledge alone. If your wish is to become really 
a man of science, and not a petty experimentalist, I should advise 
you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy, including 
mathematics." 

He then took me into his laboratory, and explained to me the 
uses of his various machines ; instructing me as to what I ought to 
procure, and promising me the use of his own, when I should have 
advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 39 

He also gave me the list of books which I had requested ; and I 
took my leave. 

Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided mj future destiny.  



CHAPTER III. 

 jROM this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, 
 in the most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly 
my sole occupation. I read with ardor those works, so full of genius and discrimination, which modern inquirers have written on 
these subjects. I attended the lectures, and cultivated the acquaintance, of the men of science of the university; and I found even in 
M. Krempe a great deal of sound sense and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive physiognomy and manners, but 
not on that account the less valuable. In M. Waldman I found a 
true friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism; and 
his instructions were given with an air of frankness and good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. It was, perhaps, the 
amiable character of this man that inclined me more to that branch 
of natural philosophy which he professed, than an intrinsic love for 
the science itself. But this state of mind had place only in the first 
steps towards knowledge : the more fully I entered into the science, 
the more exclusively I pursued it for its own sake. That application which at first had been a matter of duty and resolution, now 
became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared in the 
light of morning while I was yet engaged in my laboratory. 

As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that I improved 
rapidly. My ardor was indeed the astonishment of the students ; 
and my proficiency, that of the masters. Professor Krempe often 
asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on ; while 
M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner, during which I paid no 
visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of 
some discoveries which I hoped to make. None but those who 
have experienced them can conceive of the enticements of Science. 
In other studies you go as far as others have gone before you, and 
there is nothing more to know; but in a scientific pursuit there is 
continual food for discovery and wonder. A mind of moderate 



40 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

capacity, which closely pursues one study, must infallibly arrive at 
great proficiency in that study; and I who continually sought the 
attainment of one object of pursuit, and was solely wrapped up in 
this, improved s# rapidly, that, at the end of two years, I made 
some discoveries in the improvement of some chemical instruments, 
which procured me great esteem and admiration at the university. 
When I arrived at this point, and had become as well acquainted 
with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as depended on 
the lessons of any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence 
there being no longer conducive to my improvement, I thought of 
returning to my friends and my native town, when an incident happened that protracted my stay. 

One of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention was the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal 
endued with life. Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle 
of life proceed? It was a bold question, and one which has ever 
been considered as a mystery ; yet with how many things are we 
upon the brink of becoming acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries. I revolved these circumstances 
in my mind, and determined thenceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branches of natural philosophy which relate to 
physiology. Unless I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been irksome, and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of life, we 
must first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with the 
science of anatomy ; but this was not sufficient ; I must also observe 
the natural decay and corruption of the human body. In my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my mind 
should be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not ever 
remember to have trembled at a tale of superstition, or to have 
feared the apparition of a spirit. Darkness had no effect upon my 
fancy; and a churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies 
deprived of life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, 
had become food for the worm. Now I was led to examine the 
cause and progress of this decay, and forced to spend days and 
nights in vaults and charnel-houses. My attention was fixed upon 
every object the most insupportable to the delicacy of the human 
feelings. I saw how the fine form of man was degraded and 
wasted ; I beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming 
cheek of life ; I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye 
and brain. I paused, examining and analyzing all the minutiae of 
causation, as exemplified in the change from life to death, and death 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 4I 

to life, until from the midst of this darkness a sudden light broke 
in upon me,  a light so brilliant and wondrous, yet so simple, that 
while I became dizzy with the immensity of prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised that among so many men of genius, who 
had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone 
should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. 

Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. The 
sun does not more certainly shine in the heavens, than that which 
I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the 
stages of discovery were distinct and probable. After days and 
nights of incredible labor and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering 
the cause of generation and life ; nay, more, I became myself capable of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter. 

The astonishment which I had at first experienced on this discovery soon gave place to delight and rapture. After so much time 
spent in painful labor, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires 
was the most gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming, that all the steps by which 
I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld 
only the result. What had been the study and desire of the wisest 
men since the creation of the world, was now within my grasp. 
Not that, like a magic scene, it all opened upon me at once : the 
information I had obtained was of a nature rather to direct my endeavors so soon as I should point them towards the object of my 
search, than to exhibit that object already accomplished. I was like 
the Arabian who had been buried with the dead, and found a passage to life aided only by one glimmering, and seemingly ineffectual, light. 

I see by your eagerness, and the wonder and hope which your 
eyes express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret 
with which I am acquainted : that cannot be; listen patiently until 
the end of my story, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved 
upon that subject. I will not lead you on unguarded and ardent as 
I then was, to your destruction and infallible misery. Learn from 
me, if not by my precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous 
is the acquirement of knowledge, and how much happier that man 
is who believes his native town to be the world, than he who aspires 
to become greater than his nature will allow. 

When I found so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I 
hesitated a long time concerning the manner in which I should employ it. Although I possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, 
yet to prepare a frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies 



4 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

of fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained a work of inconceivable 
difficulty and labor. I doubted at first whether I should attempt 
the creation of a being like myself or one of simpler organization ; 
but my imagination was too much exalted by my first success to 
permit me to doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful as man. The materials at present within my 
command hardly appeared adequate to so arduous an undertaking; 
but I doubted not that I should ultimately succeed. I prepared 
myself for a multitude of reverses ; my operations might be incessantly baffled, and at last my work be imperfect; yet, when I considered the improvement which every day takes place in science and 
mechanics, I was encouraged to hope my present attempts would at 
least lay the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider 
the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its 
impracticability. It was with these feelings that I began the creation of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts formed a 
great hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the being of a gigantic stature ; that is to say, about 
eight feet in height, and proportionably large. After having 
formed this determination, and having spent some months in successfully collecting and arranging my materials, I began. 

No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. Life 
and death appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break 
through, and pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new 
species would bless me as its creator and source; many happy and 
excellent natures would owe their being to me. No father could 
claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should deserve 
theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought, that if I could bestow 
animation upon lifeless matter, I might in process of time (although 
I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently 
devoted the body to corruption. 

These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardor. My cheek had grown pale with 
study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. 
Sometimes, on the very brink of certainty, I failed ; yet still I clung 
to the hope which the next day or the Qext hour might realize. 
One secret which I alone possessed was the hope to which I had 
dedicated myself; and the . moon gazed on my midnight labors, 
while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to 
her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret 
toil, as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave, or 



THE MODEIN PROMETHEUS. 43 

tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs 
now tremble and my eyes swim with the remembrance ; but then a 
resistless and almost frantic impulse urged me forward ; I seemed 
to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. It was 
indeed but a passing trance, that only made me feel with renewed 
acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, I 
had returned to my old habits. I collected bones from charnelhouses, and disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets 
of the human frame. In a solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the 
top of the house, and separated from all the other apartments by a 
gallery and staircase, I kept my workshop of filthy creation; my 
eyeballs were starting from their sockets in attending to the details 
of my employment. The dissecting-room and the slaughter-house 
furnished many of my materials ; and often did my human nature 
turn with loathing from my occupation, while, still urged on by an 
eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work near to 
a conclusion. 

The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, heart and 
soul, in one pursuit. It was a most beautiful season ; never did the 
fields bestow a more plentiful harvest, or the vines yield a more 
luxuriant vintage ; but my eyes were insensible to the charms of 
nature. And the same feelings which made me neglect the scenes 
around me caused me also to forget those friends who were so many 
miles absent, and whom I had not seen for so long a time. I knew 
my silence disquieted them ; and I well remembered the words of 
my father,  '' I know that while you are pleased with yourself, you 
will remember us with affection, and we shall hear regularly from 
you. You must pardon me, if I regiird any interruption in your 
correspondence as a proof that your other duties are equally neglected." 

I knew well, therefore, what would be my father's feelings; but I 
could not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in 
itself, but which had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. 
I wished, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings 
of affection until the great object which swallowed up every habit 
of my nature should be completed. 

I then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my 
neglect to vice or faultiness on my part; but I am now convinced 
that he was justified in conceiving that I should not be altogether 
free from blame. A human being in perfection ought always to 
preserve a calm and peaceful mind, and never to allow passion or a 
transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity. I do not think that the 



44 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

pursuit of knowledge is an exception to this rule. If the study to 
which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections, 
and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no 
alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is 
to say, not befitting the human mind. If this rule were always observed, if no man allowed any pursuit whatsoever to interfere with 
the tranquillity of his domestic affections, Greece had not been enslaved ; Caesar would have spared his country; America would 
have been discovered more gradually; and the empires of Mexico 
and Peru had not been destroyed. 

But I forget that I am moralizing in the most interesting part of 
my tale ; and your looks remind me to proceed. 

My father made no reproach in his letters, and only took notice 
of my silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly 
than before. Winter, Spring, and Summer passed during my 
labors ; but I did not watch the blossom or the expanding leaves,  
sights which before always yielded me supreme delight,  so deeply 
was I engrossed in my occupation. The leaves of that year had 
withered before my work drew near to a close ; and now every day 
showed me more plainly how well I had succeeded. But my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared rather like one 
doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other unwholesome 
trade, than an artist occupied by his favorite employment. Every 
night I was oppressed by a slow fever, and I became nervous to a 
most painful degree,  ; a disease that I dreaded the more because I 
had hitherto enjoyed most excellent health, and had always boasted 
of the firmness of my nerves. But I believed that exercise and 
amusement would soon drive away such symptoms ; and I promised 
myself both of these, when my creation should be complete. 



CHAPTER IV. 

IT was on a dreary night of November that I beheld the accomplishment of my toils. With an anxiety that almost amounted 
to agony, I collected the instruments of life around me, that I 
might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my 
feet. It Avas already one in the morning; the rain pattered dismally against the panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 45 

by the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the dull yellow 
eye of the creature open ; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion 
agitated its limbs. 

How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate the wretch whom, with such infinite pains and care, I had 
endeavored to form? His limbs were in proportion, and I had 
selected his features as beautiful. Beautiful! Great God! His 
yellow skin scarcely covered the work of muscles and arteries beneath ; his hair was of a lustrous black, and flowing; his teeth of a 
pearly whiteness ; but these luxuriances only formed a more horrid 
contrast with his watery eyes, that seemed almost of the same color 
as the dun white sockets in which they were set, his shrivelled complexion, and straight black lips. 

The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings of human nature. I had worked hard for nearly two years, 
for the sole purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body. For 
this I had deprived myself of rest and health. I had desired it with 
an ardor that far exceeded moderation ; but now that I had finished, 
the beauty of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart. Unable to endure the aspect of the being I 
had created, I rushed out of the room, and continued a long time 
traversing my bed-chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep. 
At length lassitude succeeded to the tumult I had before endured; 
and I threw myself on the bed in my clothes, endeavoring to seek 
a few moments of forgetfulness. But it was in vain : I slept indeed, 
but I was disturbed by the wildest dreams. I thought I saw Elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in the streets of Ingolstadt. 
Delighted and surprised, I embraced her; but as I imprinted the 
first kiss on her lips, th became livid with the hue of death ; her 
features appeared to change, and I thought that I held the corpse 
of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her form, 
and I saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel. 
I started from my sleep with horror ; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, 
by the dim and yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way 
through the window-shutters, I beheld the wretch, the miserable 
monster whom I had created. He held up the curtain of the bed ; 
and his eyes, if eyes they may be called, were fixed on me. His 
jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a 
grin wrinkled his cheeks. 

He might have spoken, but I did not hear; one hand was 
stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I escaped, and rushed 



46 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

down stairs. I took refuge in the court-yard belonging to the 
house which I inhabited ; where I remained during the rest of the 
night, walking up and down in the greatest agitation, listening 
atteintively, catching and fearing each sound as if it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corse to which I had so 
miserably given life. 

Oh ! no mortal could support the horror of that countenance. 
A mummy again endued with animation could not be so hideous 
as that wretch. I had gazed on him while unfinished : he was 
ugly then ; but when those muscles and joints were rendered 
capable of motion, it became a thing such as even Dante could 
not have conceived. 

I passed the night wretchedly. Sometimes my pulse beat so 
quickly and hardly, that I felt the palpitation of every artery ; at 
others, I nearly sank to the ground through languor and extreme 
weakness. Mingled with this horror, I felt the bitterness of disappointment : dreams that had been my food and pleasant rest for 
so long a space, were now become a hell to me ; and the change 
was so rapid, the overthrow so complete ! 

Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned, and discovered to 
my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white 
steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter 
opened the gates of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as 
if I sought to avoid the wretch whom I feared every turning of the 
street would present to my view. I did not dare return to the 
apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, although wetted by the rain,- which poured from a black and comfortless sky. 

I continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavoring, 
by bodily exercise, to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. 
I traversed the streets, without any clear conception of where I was, 
or what 1 was doing. My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear; 
and I hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about 
me :  

Like one who, on a lonely road, 

Doth walk in fear and dread, 
And, having once turned round, walks on, 

And turns no more his head ; 
Because he knows a frightful fiend 

Doth close behind him tread.'' 


 Coleridge's "Ancient Mariner." 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 4 

Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at which 
the various diligences and carriages usually stopped. Here I 
paused, I know not why; but I remained some minutes with my 
eyes fixed on a coach that was coming towards me from the other 
end of the street. As it drew nearer, I observed that it was the 
Swiss diligence : it stopped just where I was standing; and, on the 
door being opened, I perceived Henry Clerval, who, on seeing me, 
instantly sprung out. ''My dear Frankenstein," exclaimed he, 
" how glad I am to see you ! how fortunate that you should be here 
at the very moment of my alighting! " 

Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Clerval ; his presence 
brought back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those 
scenes of home so dear to my recollection. I grasped his hand, 
and in a moment forgot my horror and misfortune; I felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months, calm and serene 
joy. I welcomed my friend, therefore, in the most cordial manner, 
and we walked towards my college. Clerval continued talking for 
some time about our mutual friends, and his own good fortune in 
being permitted to come to Ingolstadt. ''You may easily believe, 
said he, ''how great was the difliculty to persuade my father that 
it was not absolutely necessary for a merchant not to understand 
any thing except book-keeping; and, indeed, I believe I left him 
incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my unwearied 
entreaties was the same as that of the Dutch schoolmaster in the 
' Vicar of Wakefield : ' 'I have ten thousand florins a year without 
Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.' But his aff'ection for me at 
length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has permitted me 
to undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of knowledge." 

"It gives me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me how 
you left my father, brothers, and Elizabeth." 

"Very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear 
from you so seldom. By-the-bye, I mean to lecture you a little 
upon their account myself. But, my dear Frankenstein," continued 
he, stopping short, and gazing full in my face, "I did not before 
remark how very ill you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if 
you had been watching for several nights." 

"You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged 
in one occupation, that I have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as 
you see : but I hope, I sincerely hope, that all these employments 
are now at an end, and that I am at length free." 

I trembled excessively; I could not endure to think of, and far 
less to allude to the occurrences of the preceding night. I walked 



48 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. I then 
reflected, and the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom 
I had left in my apartment might still be there, alive, and walking 
about. I dreaded to behold this monster; but I feared still more 
that Henry should see him. Entreating him therefore to remain a 
few minutes at the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my 
own room. My hand was already on the lock of the door before I 
recollected myself. I then paused ; and a cold shivering came 
over me. I threw the door forcibly open, as children are accustomed to do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting for 
them on the other side ; but nothing appeared. I stepped fearfully 
in: the apartment was empty; and my bed-room was also freed 
from its hideous guest. I could hardly believe that so great a 
good-fortune could have befallen me ; but, when I became assured 
that my enemy had indeed fled, I clapped my hands for joy, and 
ran down to Clerval. 

We ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought 
breakfast; but I was unable to contain myself. It was not joy 
only that possessed me : I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat rapidly. I was unable to remain for a 
single instant in the same place; I jumped over the chairs, clapped 
my hands and laughed aloud. Clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival ; but when he observed me more 
attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes for which he could not 
account ; and my loud, unrestrained, heartless laughter frightened 
and astonished him. 

" My dear Victor," cried he, '' what, for God's sake, is the matter? 
Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the 
cause of all this ?" 

"' Do not ask me," cried I, putting my hands before my eyes, for 
I thought I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; " le can 
tell. Oh, save me ! save me ! " I imagined that the monster seized 
me ; I struggled furiously, and fell down in a fit. 

Poor Clerval! what must have been his feelings. A meeting, 
which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was not the witness of his grief; for I was lifeless, and 
did not recover my senses for a long, long time. 

This was the commencement of a nervous fever, which confined 
me for several months. During all that time Henry was my only 
nurse. I afterwards learned, that, knowing my father's advanced 
age, and unfitness for so long a journey, and how wretched' my 
sickness would make Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by con


THE MODERN PROMETHEUS, 49 

cealing the extent of my disorder. He knew that I could not have 
a more kind and attentive nurse than himself; and, firm in the 
hope he felt of my recovery, he did not doubt, that, instead of 
doing harm, he performed the kindest action that he could tovards 
them. 

But I was in reality very ill ; and surely nothing but the unbounded 
and unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me to 
life. The form of the monster on whom I had bestowed existence 
was for ever before my eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning 
him. Doubtless my words surprised Henry; he at first believed 
them to be the wanderings of my disturbed imagination ; but the 
pertinacity with which I continually recurred to the same subject 
persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event. 

By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses, that alarmed 
and grieved my friend, I recovered. I remember the first time I 
became capable of observing outward objects with any kind of 
pleasure, I perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared, and 
that the young buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded 
my window. It was a divine spring; and the season contributed 
greatly to my convalescence. I felt also sentiments of joy and 
affection revive in my bosom ; my gloom disappeared, and in a 
short time I became as cheerful as before I was attacked by the 
fatal passion. 

" Dearest Clerval," exclaimed I, " how kind, how very good you 
are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as 
you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How 
shall I ever repay you? I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which I have been the occasion ; but you will forgive me." 

''You will repay me entirely, if you do not discompose yourself, 
but get well as fast as you can ; and since you appear in such good 
spirits, I may speak to you on one subject, may I not." 

I trembled. One subject! what could it be? Could he allude to 
an object on whom I dared not even think? 

 Compose yourself," said Clerval, who observed my change of 
color, ''I will not mention it, if it agitates you; but your father 
and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from you 
in your own handwriting. They hardly know how ill you have 
been, and are uneasy at your long silence." 

''Is that all, my dear Henry? How could you suppose that my 

4 



50 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

first thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends, whom 
I love, and who are so deserving of my love?" 

''If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be 
glad to see a letter that has been lying here some days for you : it 
15 from your cousin, I believe." 



CHAPTER V. 

LERVAL then put the following letter into my hands :  

''To V. Frankenstein. 

"My dear Cousin,  I cannot describe to you the uneasiness we 
have all felt concerning your health. We cannot help imagining 
that your friend Clerval conceals the extent of your disorder; for it 
is now several months since we have seen your handwriting; and 
all this time you have been obliged to dictate your letters to Henry. 
Surely, Victor, you must have been exceedingly ill; and this makes 
us all very wretched, as much so nearly as after the death of your 
dear mother. My uncle was almost persuaded that you were indeed 
dangerously ill, and could hardly be restrained from undertaking 
a journey to Ingolstadt. Clerval always writes that you are getting 
better; I eagerly hope that you will confirm this intelligence soon 
in your own handwriting; for indeed, indeed, Victor, we are all 
very miserable on this account. Relieve us from this fear, and we 
shall be the happiest creatures in the world. Your father's health 
is now so vigorous, that he appears ten years younger since last 
winter. Ernest also is so much improved, that you would hard 
know him : he is now nearly sixteen, and has lost that sickly 
appearance which he had some years ago : he is grown quite robust 
and active. 

"My uncle and I conversed a long time last night about what 
profession Ernest should follow. His constant illness when young 
has deprived him of the habits of application ; and now that he 
enjoys good health, he is continually in the open air, climbing the 
hills, or rowing on the lake. I therefore proposed that he should 
be a farmer; which you know, cousin, is a favorite scheme of mine. 
A farmer's is a very healthy, happy life ; and the least hurtful, or 
rather the most beneficial, profession of any. My uncle had an 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 5 1 

idea of his being educated as an advocate, that through his interest 
he might become a judge. But, beside that he is not at all fitted 
for such an occupation, it is certainly more creditable to cultivate 
the earth for the sustenance of man, than to be the confidant, and 
sometimes the accomplice, of his vices; which is the profession of 
a lawyer. I said that the employments of a prosperous farmer, if 
they were not a more honorable, they were at least a happier 
species of occupation than that of a judge, whose misfortune it was 
always to meddle with the dark side of human nature. My uncle 
smiled, and said that I ought to be an advocate myself, which put 
an end to the conversation on that subject. 

''And now I must tell you a little story that will please and 
perhaps amuse you. Do you not remember Justine Moritz? Probably you do not; I will relate her history, therefore, in a few 
words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four 
children, of whom Justine was the third. This girl had always 
been the favorite of her father ; but, through a strange perversity'-, 
her mother could not endure her, and, after the death of M. Moritz, 
treated her very ill. My aunt observed this ; and, when Justine 
was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother to allow her to 
live at her house. The republican institutions of our country have 
produced simpler and happier manners than those which prevail in 
the great monarchies that surround it. Hence there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower 
orders being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are 
more refined and moral. A servant in Geneva does not mean the 
same thing as a servant in France or England. Justine, thus 
received in our family, learned the duties of servant; a condition 
which, in our fortunate country, does not include the idea of 
ignorance, and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being. 

"After what I have said, I dare say you well remember the 
heroine of my little tale : for Justine was a great favorite of yours ; 
and I recollect you once remarked, that if you were in an ill humor, 
one glance from Justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that 
Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of Angelica,  she looked so 
frank-hearted and happy. My aunt conceived a great attachment 
for her, by which she was induced to give her an education superior 
to that which she had at first intended. This benefit was fully 
repaid ; Justine was the most grateful little creature in the world : 
I do not mean that she made any professions, I never heard one 
pass her lips ; but you could see by her eyes that she almost adored 
her protectress. Although her disposition was gay, and in many 



5 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every 
gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model of all excellence, 
and endeavored to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that 
even now she often reminds me of her. 

''When my dearest aunt died, every one was too much occupied 
in their own grief to notice poor Justine, who had attended her 
during her illness with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine 
was very ill ; but other trials were reserved for her. 

" One by one, her brothers and sister died ; and her mother, with 
the exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. The 
conscience of the woman was troubled ; she began to think that 
the deaths of her favorites was a judgment from Heaven to chastise 
her partiality. She was a Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had conceived. Accordingly, a 
few months after your departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called 
home by her repentant mother. Poor girl ! she wept when she 
quitted our house : she was much altered since the death of my 
aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before been remarkable for vivacity. Nor was her 
residence at her mother's house of a nature to restore her gayety. 
The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She 
sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness, but much 
oftener accused her of having caused the deaths of her brothers 
and sister. Perpetual fretting at length threw Madame Moritz into 
a decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is now at 
peace for ever. She died on the first approach of cold weather, at 
the beginning of this last winter. Justine has returned to us ; and 
I assure you I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle, and 
extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her mien and her expressions continually remind me of my dear aunt. 

"I must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little 
darling William. I wish you could see him ; he is very tall of his 
age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling 
hair. When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, 
which are rosy with health. He has already had one or two little 
wivesy but Louisa Biron is his favorite, a pretty little girl of five 
years of age. 

'' Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to be indulged in a little 
gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss 
Mansfield has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, 
Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 53 

banker, last autumn. Your favorite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, 
has suffered several misfortunes since the departure of Clerval from 
Geneva. But he has already recovered his spirits, and is reported 
to be on the point of marrying a very lively pretty French woman, 
Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir ; 
but she is very much admired, and a favorite with everybody. 

''I have written myself into good spirits, dear cousin; yet I cannot conclude without again anxiously inquiring concerning your 
health. Dear Victor, if you are not very ill, write yourself, and 
make your father and all of us happy; or  I cannot bear to think 
of the other side of the question ; my tears already flow. Adieu, 
my dearest cousin. Elizabeth Lavenza. 

" Geneva, March i8th, 17." 
' Dear, dear Elizabeth ! " I exclaimed when I had read her letter; ' I will write instantly, and relieve them from the anxiety they must 
feel." I wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me ; but my convalescence had commenced, and proceeded regularly. In another 
fortnight I was able to leave my chamber. 

One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce Clerval 
to the several professors of the university. In doing this, I underwent a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind 
had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of my labors 
and the beginning of my misfortunes, I had conceived a violent 
antipathy even to the name of natural philosophy. When I was 
otherwise quite restored to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony of my nervous symptoms. Henry 
saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view. He 
had also changed my apartment; for he perceived that I had acquired a dislike for the room which had previously been my laboratory. But these cares of Clerval were made of no avail when I 
visited the professors. M. Waldman inflicted torture when he 
praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress I had 
made in the sciences. He soon perceived that I disliked the subject; but not guessing the real cause, he attributed my feelings to 
modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement to the 
science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out. 
What could I do? He meant to please and he tormented me. I 
felt as if he had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those 
instruments which were to be afterwards used in putting me to a 
slow and cruel death. I writhed under his words, yet dared not 
exhibit the pain I felt. Clerval, whose eyes and feelings were 



54 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

always quick in discerning the sensations of others, declined the 
subject, alleging in excuse his total ignorance; and the conversation took a more general turn. I thanked my friend from my heart, 
but I did not speak. I saw plainly that he was surprised, but he 
never attempted to draw my secret from me ; and although I loved 
him with a mixture of affection and reverence that knew no bounds, 
yet I could never persuade myself to confide to him that event 
which was so often present to my recollection, but which I feared 
the detail to another would only impress more deeply. 

M. Krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that 
time, of almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh, blunt encomiums gave me even more pain than the benevolent approbation 
of M. Waldman. " D n the fellow ! " cried he ; '' why, M. Clerval, 
I assure you he has outstripped us all. Aye, aye, stare if you please ; 
but it IS nevertheless true. A youngster who, but a few years ago, 
believed Cornelius Agrippa .as firmly as the gospel, has now set 
himself at the head of the university; and if he is not soon pulled 
down, we shall all be out of countenance. Aye, aye," continued he, 
observing my face expressive of suffering, " M. Frankenstein is 
modest; an excellent quality in a young man. Young men should 
be diffident of themselves, you know, M. Clerval ; I was myself 
when young; but that wears out in a very short time." 

M. Krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which 
happily turned the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me. 

Clerval was no natural philosopher. His imagination was too 
vivid for the minutiae of science. Languages were his principal 
study; and he sought, by acquiring their elements, to open a field 
for self-instruction on his return to Geneva. Persian, Arabic, and 
Hebrew gained his attention after he had made himself perfectly 
master of Greek and Latin. For my own part, idleness had ever 
been irksome to me ; and now that I wished to fly from reflection, 
and hated my former studies, I felt great relief in being the fellowpupil with my friend, and found not only instruction but coilsola-, 
tion in the works of the Orientalists. Their melancholy is soothing, 
and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying 
the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, 
life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses  in the 
smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your 
own heart. How different from the manly and heroical poetry of 
Greece and Rome. 

Summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 55 

Geneva was fixed for the latter end of autumn ; but being delayed 
by several accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were 
deemed impassable, and my journey was retarded until the ensuing 
spring. I felt this delay very severely; for I longed to see my native town, and my beloved friends. My return had only been 
delayed so long from an unwillingness to leave Clerval in a strange 
place before he had become acquainted with any of its inhabitants. 
The winter, however, was spent cheerfullj; and although the spring 
was uncommonly late, when it came, its beauty compensated for its 
dilatoriness. 

The month of May had already commenced, and I expected the 
letter daily which was to fix the date of my departure, when Henry 
proposed a pedestrian tour through the environs of Ingolstadt, that 
I might bid a personal farewell to the country I had so long inhabited. I acceded with pleasure to this proposition : I was fond of 
exercise, and Clerval had always been my favorite companion in 
the rambles of this nature that I had taken among the scenes in my 
native country. 

We passed a fortnight in these perambulations : my health and 
spirits had long been restored, and they gained additional strength 
from the salubrious air I breathed, the natural incidents of our 
progress, and the conversation of my friend. Study had before 
secluded me from the intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and rendered me unsocial ; but Clerval called forth the better feelings of 
my heart; he again taught me to love the aspect of nature, and the 
cheerful faces of children. Excellent friend ! how sincerely did you 
love me, and endeavor to elevate my mind, until it was on a level 
with your own. A selfish pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, 
until your gentleness and affection warmed and opened my senses; 
I became the same happy creature who, a few years ago, loving and 
beloved by all, had no sorrow or care. When happy, inanimate 
nature had the power of bestowing on me the most delightful sensations. A serene sky and verdant fields filled me with ecstasy. 
The present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring 
bloomed in the hedges, while those of summer were already in bud : 
I was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had 
pressed upon me, notwithstanding my endeavors to throw them oft, 
with an invincible burden. 

Henry rejoiced in my gayety, and sincerely sympathized in my 
feelings : he exerted himself to amuse me, while he expressed the 
sensations that filled his soul. The resources of his mind on this 
occasion were truly astonishing : his conversation was full of im


5 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

agination, and very often, in imitation of the Persian and Arabic 
writers, he invented tales of wonderful fancy and passion. At 
other times he repeated my favorite poems, or drew me out into 
arguments, which he supported with great ingenuity. 

We returned to our college on a Sunday afternoon : the peasants 
were dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. My 
own spirits were high, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. 



o 



CHAPTER VI. 

N my return, I found the following letter from my father :  

"To V. Frankenstein. 



" My dear Victor,  You have probably waited impatiently for a 
letter to fix the date of your return to us ; and I was at first tempted 
to write only a few lines, merely mentioning the day on which I 
should expect you. But that would be a cruel kindness, and I dare 
not do it. But what would be your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and gay welcome, to behold, on the contrary, tears 
and wretchedness ! And how, Victor, can I relate your misfortune. 
Absence cannot have rendered you callous to our joys and griefs ; 
and how shall I inflict pain on an absent child? I wish to prepare 
you for the woful news, but I know it is impossible ; even now 
your eye skims over the page, to seek the words which are to convey to you the horrible tidings. 

"William is dead! that sweet child, whose smiles delighted and 
warmed my heart; who was so gentle yet so gay! Victor, he is 
murdered ! 

" I will not attempt to console you ; but I will simply relate the 
circumstances of the transaction. 

"Last Thursday (May 7th), I, my niece, and your two brothers, 
went to walk in Plainpalais. The evening was warm and serene, 
and we prolonged our walk farther than usual. It was already dusk 
before we thought of returning; and then we discovered that William and Ernest, who had gone on before, were not to be found. 
We accordingly rested on a seat until they should return. Presently 
Ernest came, and inquired if we had seen his brother : he said that 
they had been playing together, that William had run away to hide 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 



SI 



himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and afterwards waited 
for him a long time, but that he did not return. 

''This account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for 
him until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured that he might have 
returned to the house. He was not thero. We returned again with 
torches ; for I could not rest when I thought that mj sweet boy had 
lost himself, and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night : 
Elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish. About five in the morning I discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before I had seen 
blooming and active in health, stretched on the grass livid and 
motionless : the print of the murderer's finger was on his neck. 

" He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible on my 
countenance betrayed the secret to Elizabeth. She was very earnest to see the corpse. At first I attempted to prevent her; but she 
persisted, and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined 
the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands, exclaimed, ' O God, 
I have murdered my darling infant! ' 

''She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. When 
she again lived, it was only to weep and sigh. She told me that 
that same evening William had teased her to let him wear a very 
valuable miniature that she possessed of your mother. The picture 
is gone, and was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed. We have no trace of him at present, although 
our exertions to discover him are unremitted ; but they will not 
restore my beloved William. 

"Come, dearest Victor; you alone can console Elizabeth. She 
weeps continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his 
death; her words pierce my heart. We are all unhappy; but will 
not that be an additional motive for you, my son, to return and be 
our comforter? Your dear mother! Alas, Victor! I now say, 
thank God she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of 
her youngest darling! 

" Come, Victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the 
assassin, but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal 
instead of festering the wounds of our minds. Enter the house of 
mourning, my friend, but with kindness and affection for those who 
love you, and not with hatred for your enemies. 
"Your affectionate and afSicted father, 

"Alphonse Frankenstein. 

"Geneva, May 12th, 17." 

Clerval, who had watched my countenance as I read this letter, 
was surprised to observe the despair that succeeded to the joy I at 



58 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

first expressed on receiving news from my friends. I threw the letter on the table, and covered my face with my hands. 

''My dear Frankenstein," exclaimed Henry, when he perceived 
me weep with bitterness, ''are you always to be unhappy? My 
dear friend, what has happened?" 

I motioned to him to take up the letter, while I walked up and 
down the room in the extremest agitation. Tears also gushed from 
the eyes of Clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune. 
' I can offer you no consolation, my friend," said he; "your disaster is irreparable. What do you intend to do?" 

" To go instantly to Geneva : come with me, Henry, to order the 
horses." 

During our walk, Clerval endeavored to raise my spirits. He did 
not do this by common topics of consolation. Those maxims of 
the Stoics, that death was no evil, and that the mind of man ought 
to be superior to despair on the eternal absence of a beloved object, 
ought not to be urged. Even Cato wept over the dead body of his 
brother. 

Clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets ; the words 
impressed themselves on my mind, and I remembered them afterwards in my solitude. But now, as soon as the horses arrived, I 
hurried into a cabriole, and bade farewell to my friend. 

My journey was very melancholy. At first I wished to hurry on, 
for I longed to console and sympathize with my loved and sorrowing friends ; but when I drew near my native town, I slackened my 
progress. I could hardly sustain the multitude of feelings that 
crowded into my mind. I passed through scenes familiar to my 
youth, but which I had not seen for nearly six years. How altered 
every thing might be during that time ! One sudden and desolating 
change had taken place ; but a thousand little circumstances might 
have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they 
were done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive. Fear 
overcame me; I dared not advance, dreading a thousand nameless evils that made me tremble, although I was unable to define 
them. 

I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind. 
I contemplated the lake : the waters were placid ; all around was 
calm, and the snowy mountains, " the palaces of nature," were not 
changed. By degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, 
and I continued my journey towards Geneva. 

The road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as I 
approached my native town. I discovered more distinctly the black 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 59 

sides of Jura, and the bright summit of Mont Blanc; I wept like a 
child: ''Dear mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you 
welcome your wanderer? Your summits are clear; the sky and 
lake are blue and placid. Is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock 
at my unhappiness?" 

I fear, my friend, that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling 
on these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative happiness, and I think of them with pleasure. My country, 
my beloved country ! who but a native can tell the delight I took 
in again beholding thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than 
all, thy lovely lake. 

Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. 
Night also closed around ; and when I could hardly see the dark 
mountains, I felt still more gloomily. The picture appeared a vast 
and diin scene of evil, and I foresaw obscurely that I was destined 
to become the most wretched of human beings. Alas! I prophesied 
truly, and failed only in one single circumstance,  that, in all the 
misery I imagined and dreaded, I did not conceive the hundredth 
part of the anguish that I was destined to endure. 

It was completely dark when I arrived in the environs of Geneva; 
the gates of the town were already shut; and I was obliged to pass 
the night at Secheron, a village half a league to the east of the city. 
The sky was serene ; and, as I was unable to rest, I resolved to visit 
the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I could 
not pass through the town I was obliged to cross the lake in a boat 
to arrive at Plainpalais. During this short voyage I saw the lightnings playing on the summit of Mont Blanc in the most beautiful 
figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly; and, on landing, 
I ascended a low hill, that I might observe its progress. It advanced ; 
the heavens were clouded, and I soon felt the rain coming slowly in 
large drops, but its violence quickly increased. 

I quitted my seat and walked on, although the darkness and 
storm increased every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific 
crash over my head. It was echoed from Saleve, the Juras, and the 
Alps of Savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for 
an instant every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye 
recovered itself from the preceding flash. The storm, as is often 
the case in Switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the 
heavens. The most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, 
over that part of the lake which lies between the promontory of 
Belrive and the village of Copet. Another storm enlightened Jura 



6o FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

with faint flashes ; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed 
the Mole, a peaked mountain to the east of the lake. 

While I watched the storm, so beautiful jet terrific, I wandered 
on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky elevated my spirits ; 
I clasped my hands and exclaimed aloud, 'William, dear angel! 
this is thy funeral, this thy dirge ! " As I said these words, I perceived a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me : 
I stood fixed, gazing intently : I could not be mistaken. A flash of 
lightning illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly 
to me ; its gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect, more 
hideous than belongs to humanity, instantly informed' me that it 
was the wretch, the filthy demon to whom I had given life. What 
did he there? Could he be (I shuddered at the conception) the 
murderer of my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination than I became convinced of its truth ; my teeth chattered, 
and I was forced to lean against a tree for support. The figure 
passed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. Nothing in human 
shape could have destroyed that fair child. He was the murderer! 
I could not doubt it. The mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the fact. I thought of pursuing the devil ; but it 
would have been in vain, for another flash discovered him to me 
hanging among the rocks of the nearly perpendicular ascent of 
Mount Saleve, a hill that bounds Plainpalais on the south. He 
soon reached the summit and disappeared. 

I remained motionless. The thunder ceased; but the rain still 
continued, and the scene was enveloped in impenetrable darkness. 
I revolved in my mind the events which I had until now sought to 
forget; the whole train of my progress towards the creation; the 
appearance of the work of my own hands alive at my bedside ; its 
departure. Two years had now elapsed since the night on which 
he first received life; and was this his first crime? Alas, I had 
turned loose into the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was 
in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother? 

No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder 
of the night, which I spent cold and wet in the open air. But I did 
not feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was 
busy in scenes of evil and despair. I considered the being 
whom I had cast among mankind, and endowed with the will 
and power to effect purposes of horror, such as the deed which 
he had now done, nearly in the light of my own vampire, my own 
spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy all that was 
dear to me. 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 6l 

Day dawned, and I directed my steps towards the town. The 
gates were open, and I hastened to my father's house. My first 
thought was to discover what I knew of the murderer, and cause 
instant pursuit to be made. But I paused when I reflected on the 
story that I had to tell. A being whom I myself had formed, 
and endued with life, had met me at midnight among the precipices 
of an inaccessible mountain. I remembered also the nervous fever 
with which I had been seized just at the time that I dated my creation, and which would give an air of delirium to a tale otherwise 
so improbable. I well knew that if any other had communicated 
such a relation to me, I should have looked upon it as the ravings 
of insanity. Besides, the strange nature of the animal would elude 
all pursuit, even if I were so far credited as to persuade my relatives 
to commence it. Besides, of what use would be pursuit? Who 
could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of 
Mount Saleve.f These reflections determined me, and I resolved to 
remain silent. 

It was about five in the morning when I entered my father's 
house. I told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into 
the library to attend their usual hour of rising. 

Six years had elapsed, passed as a dream but for one indelible 
trace; and I stood in the same place where I had last embraced my 
father, before my departure for Ingolstadt. Beloved and respected 
parent ! He still remained to me. I gazed on the picture of my 
mother, which stood over the mantel-piece. It was an historical 
subject, painted at my father's desire, and represented Caroline 
Beaufort in an agony of despair kneeling by the cofiin of her dead 
father. Her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale ; but there was an 
air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the sentiment of 
pity. Below this picture was a miniature of William, and my tears 
flowed when I looked upon it. While I was thus engaged Ernest 
entered ; he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me. 
He expressed a sorrowful delight to see me. " Welcome, my dearest 
Victor," said he. ''Ah! I wish you had come three months ago, 
and then you would have found us all joyous and delighted. But 
we are now unhappy, and I am afraid tears instead of smiles will 
be your welcome. Our father looks so sorrowful : this dreadful 
event seems to have revived in his mind his grief at the death of 
mamma. Poor Elizabeth also is quite inconsolable." Ernest began 
to weep as he said these words. 

''Do not," said I, "welcome me thus; try to be more calm, 
that I may not be absolutely miserable the moment I enter my 



62 



FRANKENSTEIN ; OR. 



father's house after so long an absence. But, tell me, how does 
my father support his misfortunes; and how is my poor Elizabeth ? " 

" She indeed requires consolation : she accused herself of having 
caused the death of my brother, and that made her very wretchedBut since the murderer has been discovered" 

'' The murderer discovered ! Good God! how can that be? who 
could attempt to pursue him? It is impossible : one might as well 
attempt to overtake the winds, or confine a mountain stream with 
a straw." 
'I do not know what you mean; but we were all very unhappy 
when she was discovered. No one would believe it at first, and 
even now Elizabeth will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the 
evidence. Indeed who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was 
so amiable, and fond of all the family, could all at once become so 
extremely wicked ? " 

''Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is 
wrongfully ; every one knows that ; no one believes it, surely, 
Ernest?" 

''No one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that 
have almost forced conviction upon us ; and her own behavior has 
been so confused as to add to the evidence of facts a weight, that, 
I fear, leaves no hope for doubt. But she will be tried to-day, and 
you will then hear all." 

He related that the morning upon which the murder of poor 
William had been discovered, Justine had been taken ill, and confined to her bed; and, after several days, one of the servants happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the 
murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, 
which had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer. The 
servant instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without saying a word to any of the familj, went to a magistrate, and, upon 
their deposition, Justine was apprehended. On being charged with 
the fact, the poor girl confirmed the suspicion in a great measure 
by her extreme confusion of manner. 

This was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith ; and I 
replied earnestly, "You are all mistaken; I know the murderer. 
Justine, poor good Justine, is innocent." 

At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply 
impressed on his countenance, but he endeavored to welcome me 
cheerfully; and after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, 
would have introduced some other topic than that of our disaster, 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 63 

had not Ernest exclaimed, " Good God, papa! Victor says that he 
knows who was the murderer of poor William." 

''We do also, unfortunately," replied my father; ''for indeed I 
had rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so 
much depravity and ingratitude in one I valued so highly." 

"My dear father, you are mistaken; Justine is innocent." 

"If she is, God forbid that she should suffer as guilty. She is 
to be tried to-day, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that she will be 
acquitted." 

This speech calmed me. I was firmly convinced in my own 
mind that Justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of 
this murder. I had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial 
evidence could be brought forward strong enough to convict her; 
and, in this assurance, I calmed myself, expecting the trial with 
eagerness, but without prognosticating an evil result. 

We were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had made great alterations in her form since I last beheld her. Six years before she had 
been a pretty, good-humored girl, whom every one loved and 
caressed. She was now a woman in stature ard expression of 
countenance, which was uncommonly lovely. An open and capacious forehead gave indications of a good understanding, joined to 
great frankness of disposition. Her eyes were hazel, and expressive of mildness, now through recent affliction allied to sadness. 
Her hair was of a rich dark auburn, her complexion fair, and her 
figure slight and graceful. She welcomed me Avith the greatest 
affection. "Your arrival, my dear cousin," said she, "fills me 
with hope. You perhaps will find some means to justify my poor 
guiltless Justine. Alasi who is safe, if she be convicted of crime. 
I rely on her innocence as certainly as I do upon my own. Our 
misfortune is doubly hard to us ; we have not only lost that lovely 
darling boy, but this poor girl, whom I sincerely love, is to be torn 
away even by a worse fate. If she is condemned, I never shall 
know joy more. But she will not, I am sure she will not; and then 
I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little William." 

"She is innocent, my Elizabeth," said I, "and that shall be 
proved ; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of her acquittal." 

"How kind you are! every one else believes in her guilt, and 
that made me wretched ; for I knew that it was impossible : and to 
see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner, rendered me 
hopeless and despairing." She wept. 



64 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

''Sweet niece," said my father, "dry your tears. If she is, as 
you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our judges, and the 
activity with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality." 



CHAPTER VII. 

TT 7E passed a few sad hours, until eleven o'clock, when the trial 
  was to commence. My father and the rest of the family 
being obliged to attend as witnesses, I accompanied them to the 
court. During the whole of this wretched mockery of justice, I 
suffered living torture. It was to be decided, whether the result of 
my curiosity and lawless devices would cause the death of two of 
my fellow-beings : one a smiling babe, full of joy and innocence; 
the other far more dreadfullj murdered, with every aggravation of 
infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror. Justine 
also was a girl of merit, and possessed qualities which promised to 
render her life happy : now all was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave ; and I the cause ! A thousand times rather would I 
have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to Justine ; but 
I was absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would 
have been considered as the ravings of a madman, and would not 
have exculpated her who suffered through me. 

The appearance of Justine was calm. She was dressed in mourning; and her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the 
solemnity of her feelings, exquisitely beautiful. Yet she appeared 
confident in innocence, and did not tremble, although gazed on 
and execrated by thousands ; for all the kindness which her beau 
rnight otherwise have excited, was obliterated in the minds of the 
spectators by the imagination of the enormity she was supposed to 
have committed. She was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained ; and as her confusion had before been adduced 
as a proof of her guilt, she worked up her mind to an appearance 
of courage. When she entered the court, she threw her eyes round 
it. and quickly discovered where we were seated. A tear seemed to 
dim her eye when she saw us ; but she quickly recovered herself, 
and a look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest her utter guiltlessness. 
The trial began; and after the advocate against her had stated 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 65 

the charge, several witnesses were called. Several strange facts 
combined against her, which might have staggered any one who 
had not such proof of her innocence as I had. She had been out 
the whole of the night on which the murder had been committed, 
and towards morning had been perceived by a market-woman not 
far from the spot where the body of the murdered child had been 
found. The woman asked her what she did there ; but she looked 
very strangely, and only returned a confused and unintelligible 
answer. She returned to the house about eight o'clock ; and when 
one inquired where she had passed the night, she replied, that she 
had been looking for the child, and demanded earnestly, if any 
thing had been heard concerning him. When shown the body, she 
fell into violent hysterics, and kept her bed for several days. The 
picture was then produced, which the servant had found in her 
pocket; and when Elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it 
was the same which, an hour before the child had been missed, she 
had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation 
filled the court. 

Justine was called on for her defence. As the trial had proceeded, her countenance had altered. Surprise, sorrow, and misery, 
were strongly expressed. Sometimes she struggled with her tears; 
but when she was desired to plead, she collected her powers, and 
spoke in an audible although variable voice. 

'' God knows," she said, " how entirely I am innocent. But I do 
not pretend that my protestations should acquit me : I rest my 
innocence on a plain and simple explanation of the facts which 
have been adduced against me ; and I hope the character I have 
always borne will incline my judges to a favorable interpretation, 
where any circumstance appears doubtful or suspicious." 

She then related that, by the permission of Elizabeth, she had 
passed the evening of the night on which' the murder had been 
committed, at the house of an aunt at Chene, a village situated at 
about a league from Geneva. On her return, at about nine o'clock, 
she met a man, who asked her if she had seen any thing of the child 
who was lost. She was alarmed by this account, and passed several 
hours in looking for him, when the gates of Geneva were shut, and 
she was forced to remain several hours of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to 
whom she was well known. Unable to rest or sleep, she quitted 
her asylum early, that she might endeavor to find my brother. If 
she had gone near the spot where his body lay, it was without her 
knowledge. That she had been bewildered when questioned by 

5 



66 



FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 



the market-woman, was not surprising, since she had passed a 
sleepless night, and the fate of poor William was yet uncertain. 
Concerning the picture she could give no account. 

I know," continued the unjiappy victim, ' how heavily and 
fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but I have no 
power of explaining it; and when I have expressed my utter 
ignorance, I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities 
by which it might have been placed in my pocket. But here also I 
am checked. I believe that I have no ene on earth, and none 
surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me wantonly. Did 
the murderer place it there . I know of no opportunity afforded 
him for so doing; or if I had, why should he have stolen the jewel, 
to part with it so soon ? 
'I commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I see no 
room for hope. I beg permission to have a few witnesses examined 
concerning my character; and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt, I must be condemned, although I would 
pledge my salvation on my innocence." 

Several witnesses were called, who had known her for many 
years, and they spoke well of her; but fear, and hatred of the crime 
of which they supposed her guilty, rendered them timorous, and 
unwilling to come forward. Elizabeth saw even this last resource, 
her excellent dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail 
the accused,.' when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address the court. 

''I am," said she, ''the cousin of the unhappy child who was 
murdered, or rather his sister, for I was educated by and have 
lived with his parents ever since and even long before his death. 
It may therefore be judged indecent in me to come forward on 
this occasion; but when I see a fellow-creature about to perish 
through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to be allowed 
to speak, that I may say what I know of her character. I am well 
acquainted with the accused. I have lived in the same house with 
her, at one time for five, and at another for nearly two years. 
During all that period she appeared to me the most amiable and 
benevolent of human creatures. She nursed Madame Frankenstein, 
my aunt, in her last illness with the greatest affection and care ; 
and afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious illness, 
in a manner that excited the admiration of all who knew her. 
After which she again lived in my uncle's house, where she was 
beloved by all the family. She was warmly attached to the child 
who is now dead, and acted towards him like a most affectionate 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 6 

mother. For my own part, I do not hesitate to say, that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and rely 
on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an 
action : as to the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had 
earnestly desired it, I should have willingly given it to her; so 
much do I esteem and value her." 

Excellent Elizabeth ! A murmur of approbation was heard ; but 
it was excited by her generous interference, and not in favor of 
poor Justine, on whom the public indignation was turned with renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude. She 
herself wept as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. My own 
agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial. I believed in her innocence; I knew it. Could the demon, who had (I 
did not for a minute doubt) murdered my brother, also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy? I 
could not sustain the horror of my situation ; and when I perceived 
that the popular voice, and the countenances of the judges, had 
already condemned my unhappy victim, I rushed out of the court 
in agony. The tortures of the accused did not equal mine ; she was 
sustained by innocence, and the fangs of remorse tore my bosorn, 
and would not forego their hold. 

I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness. In the morning I 
went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not 
ask the fatal question ; but I was known, and the officer guessed the 
cause of my visit. The ballots had been thrown ; they were all 
black, and Justine was condemned. 

I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before experienced sensations of horror; and I have endeavored to bestow 
upon them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea 
of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to 
whom I addressed myself added, that Justine had already confessed 
her guilt. ''That evidence," he observed, ''was hardly required in 
so glaring a case, but I am glad of it; and, indeed, none of our 
judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be 
it ever so decisive." 

When I returned home, Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result. 
' My cousin," replied I, " it is decided as you may have expected ; 
all judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer, than that one 
guilty should escape. But she has confessed." 

This was a dire blow to poor Elizabeth, who had relied with firmness upon Justine's innocence. "Alas!" said she, "how shall I 
ever again believe in human benevolence. Justine, whom I loved 



68 



FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 



and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on those smiles of 
innocence only to betray? her mild eyes seemed incapable of any 
severity or ill-humor, and yet she has committed a murder." 

Soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a wish to 
see my cousin. My father wished her not to go ; but said that he 
left it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. 

''Yes," said Elizabeth, "I will go, although she is guilty; and 
you, Victor, shall accompany me : I cannot go alone." The idea 
of this visit was torture to me, yet I could not refuse. 

We entered the gloomy prison-chamber, and beheld Justine sitting on some straw, at the further end; her hands were manacled, 
and her head rested on her knees. She rose on seeing us enter; 
and when we were left alone with her, she threw herself at the feet 
of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly. My cousin wept also. 

" Oh, Justine ! " said she, " why did you rob me of my last consolation? I relied on your innocence; and although I was then very 
wretched, I was not so miserable as I am now." 

"And do you also believe that I am so very, very wicked? Do 
you also join with my enemies to crush me?" Her voice was suffocated with sobs. 

" Rise, my poor girl," said Elizabeth, "why do you kneel, if you 
are innocent? I am not one of your enemies ; I believed you guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until I heard that you had 
yourself declared your guilt. That report, you say, is false ; and be 
assured, dear Justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you 
for a moment, but your own confession." 

"I did confess; but I confessed a lie. I confessed, that I might 
obtain absolution ; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart 
than all my other sins. The God of Heaven forgive me ! Ever 
since I was condemned, my confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced, until I almost began to think that I was the 
monster that he said I was. He threatened excommunication and 
hell-fire in my last moments, if I continued obdurate. Dear lady, 
I had none to support me; all looked on me as a wretch doomed to 
ignominy and perdition. What could I do? In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie ; and now only am I truly miserable." 

She paused, weeping, and then continued  "I thought with 
horror, my sweet lady, that jou should believe your Justine, whom 
your blessed aunt had so highly honored, and whom you loved, was 
a creature capable of a crime which none but the devil himself 
' could have perpetrated. Dear William ! dearest, blessed child ! I 
soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all be happy; 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 69 

and that consoles me, going as I am to suffer ignominy and 
death." 
' Oh, Justine! forgive me for having for one moment distrusted 
you. Why did you confess? But do not mourn, my dear girl; I 
will everyvhere proclaim your innocence, and force belief. Yet 
you must die ; you, my playfellow, my companion, my more than 
sister. I never can survive so horrible a misfortune." 

''Dear, sweet Elizabeth, do not weep. You ought to raise me 
with thoughts of a better life, and elevate me from the petty cares 
of this world of injustice and strife. Do you not, excellent friend, 
drive me to despair." 

''I will try to comfort you; but this, I fear, is an evil too deep 
and poignant to admit of consolation, for there is no hope. Yet 
Heaven bless thee, my dearest Justine, with resignation, and a confidence elevated beyond this world. Oh ! how I hate its shows and 
mockeries! when one creature is murdered, another is immediately 
deprived of life in a slow, torturing manner; then the executioners, 
their hands yet reeking with the blood of innocence, believe that 
they have done a great deed. They call this retrzbtctio?i. Hateful 
name ! When that word is pronounced, I know greater and more 
horrid punishments are going to be inflicted than the gloomiest tyrant has ever invented to satiate his utmost revenge. Yet this is 
not consolation for you, my Justine, unless indeed that you may 
glory in escaping from so miserable a den. Alas ! I would I were in 
peace with my aunt and my lovely William, escaped from a world 
which is hateful to me, and the visages of men which I abhor." 

Justine smiled languidly. ''This, dear lady, is despair, and not 
resignation. I must not learn the lesson that you would teach me. 
Talk of something else, something that will bring peace, and not 
increase of misery." 

During the conversation I had retired to a corner of the prisonroom, where I could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me ! 
Despair! who dared talk of that.  The poor victim, who on the 
morrow was to pass the dreary boundary between life and death, 
felt not, as I did, such deep and bitter agony. I gnashed my teeth, 
and ground them together, uttering a groan that came from my inmost soul. Justine started. When she saw who it was, she approached me, and said, "Dear sir, you are very kind to visit me; 
you, I hope, do not believe that I am guilty." 

I could not answer. " No, Justine," said Elizabeth ; " he is more 
convinced of your innocence than I was ; for even when he heard 
that you had confessed, he did not credit it." 



70 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

" I truly thank him. In these last moments I feel the sincerest 
gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness. How 
sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I am ! It removes more than half my misfortune ; and I feel as if I could die 
in peace, now that my innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, 
and your cousin." 

Thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself. She 
indeed gained the resignation she desired-. But I, the true murderer, felt the never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed 
of no hope or consolation. Elizabeth also wept, and was unhappy; 
but hers also was the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that 
passes over the fair moon, for a while hides, but cannot tarnish, 
its brightness. Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core 
of my heart; I bore a hell within me, which nothing could extinguish. We stayed several hours with Justine ; and it was with 
great difficulty that Elizabeth could tear herself away. "I wish, 
cried she, " that I were to die with you ; I cannot live in this world 
of misery." 

Justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty 
repressed her bitter tears. She embraced Elizabeth, and said, in a 
voice of half-suppressed emotion,' Farewell, sweet lady, dearest 
Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend ; may Heaven in its bounty 
bless and preserve you ; may this be the last misfortune that you 
will ever suffer. Live, and be happy, and make others so." 

As we returned, Elizabeth said, "You know not, my dear Victor, 
how much I am relieved, now that I trust in the innocence of this 
unfortunate girl. I never could again have known peace, if I had 
been deceived in my reliance on her. For the moment that I did 
believe her guilty, I felt an anguish that I could not have long sustained. Now my heart is lightened. The innocent suffers ; but she 
whom I thought amiable and good has not betrayed the trust I 
reposed in her, and I am consoled." 

Amiable cousin ! such were your thoughts, mild and gentle as 
your own dear eyes and voice. But I  I was a wretch, and none 
ever conceived of the misery that I then endured. 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS.Jl 



CHAPTER VIII. 

TrOTHING is more painful to the human mind, than, after the 
-  feelings have been worked up by a quick succession of events, 
the dead calmness of inaction and certainty which follows, and deprives the soul both of hope and fear. Justine died ; she rested ; 
and I was alive. The blood flowed freely in my veins, but a weight 
of despair and remorse pressed on my heart, which nothing could 
remove. Sleep fled from my eyes ; I wandered like an evil spirit, 
for I had committed deeds of mischief beyond description horrible, 
and more, much more (I persuaded myself), was yet behind. Yet 
my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue. I had 
begun life with benevolent intentions, and thirsted for the moment 
when I should put them in practice, and make myself useful to my 
fellow-beings. Now all was blasted; instead of  that serenity of 
conscience, which allowed me to look back upon the past with 
self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, 
I was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt, which hurried me 
away to a hell of intense tortures, such as no language can 
describe. 

This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had entirely 
recovered from the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the face 
of man ; all sound of joy and complacency was torture to me ; solitude was my only consolation,  deep, dark, death-like solitude. 

My father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my disposition and habits, and endeavored to reason with me on the folly 
of giving way to immoderate grief. "Do you think, Victor," said 
he, "that I do not suffer also.? No one could love a child more 
than I loved your brother" (tears came into his eyes as he spoke) ; 
"but is it not a duty to the survivors, that we should refrain from 
augmenting their unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate 
grief.? It is also a duty owed to yourself; for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily 
usefulness, without which no man is fit for society." 

This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; 
I should have been the first to hide my grief, and console my 
friends, if remorse had not mingled its bitterness with my other 
sensations. Now I could only answer my father with a look of 
despair, and endeavor to hide myself from his view. 

About this time we retired to our house at Belrive. This change 


J2 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

was particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of the gates regularly at ten o'clock, and the impossibility of remaining on the lake 
after that hour, had rendered our residence within the walls of 
Geneva very irksome to me. I was now free. Often, after the rest 
of the family had retired for the night, I took the boat, and passed 
many hours upon the water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was 
carried hy the wind, and sometimes, after rowing into the middle 
of the lake, I left the boat to pursue its own course, and gave way 
to my own miserable reflections. I was often tempted, when all 
was at peace around me, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly, if I except some 
bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard 
only when I approached the shore,  often, I say, I was tempted to 
plunge into the silent lake, that the waters might close over me and 
my calamities for ever. But I was restrained, when I thought of 
the heroic and suifering Elizabeth, whom I tenderly loved, and 
whose existence was bound up in mine. I thought also of my 
father, and surviving brother : should I by my base desertion leave 
them exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I 
let loose among them.? 

At these moments I wept bitterly, and wished that peace would 
revisit my mind only that I might afford them consolation and happiness. But that could not be. Remorse extinguished every hope. 
I had been the author of unalterable evils ; and I lived in daily fear, 
lest the monster whom I had created should perpetrate some new  
wickedness. I had an obscure feeling that all was not over, and 
that he would still commit some signal crime, which by its enormity 
should almost efface the recollection of the past. There was always 
scope for fear, so long as any thing I loved remained behind. My 
abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. When I thought of 
him, I gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and I ardently 
wished to extinguish that life which I had so thoughtlessly bestowed. 
When I reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge 
burst all bounds of moderation. I would have made a pilgrimage 
to the highest peak of the Andes, could I, when there, have precipitated him to their base. I wished to see him again, that I might 
wreak the utmost extent of anger on his head, and avenge the 
deaths of William and Justine. 

Our house was the house of mourning. My father's health was 
deeply shaken by the horror of recent events. Elizabeth was sad 
and desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations 5 all pleasure seemed to her sacrilege towards the dead; 



. THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 73 

eternal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she 
should pay to innocence so blasted and destroyed. She was no 
longer that happy creature, who in earlier youth wandered with me 
on the banks of the lake, and talked with ecstasy of our future prospects. She had become grave, and often conversed on the inconstancy of fortune, and the instability of human life. 

 When I reflect, my dear cousin," said she, ''on the miserable 
death of Justine Moritz, I no longer see the world and its works as 
they before appeared to me. Before, I looked upon the accounts of 
vice and injustice, that I read in books or heard from others, as 
tales of ancient days, or imaginary evils ; at least they were remote, 
and more familiar to reason than to the imagination : but now misery has come home, and men appear to me as monsters thirsting 
for each other's blood. Yet I am certainly unjust. Everybody 
believed that poor girl to be guilty; and if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly she would have been 
the most depraved of human creatures. For the sake of a few 
jewels to have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend, a 
child whoin she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as 
if it had been her own ! I could not consent to the death of any 
human being; but certainly I should have thought such a creature 
unfit to remain in the society of men. Yet she was innocent; you 
are of the same opinion, and that confirms me. Alas ! Victor, when 
falsehood can look so like the truth, who can assure themselves of 
certain happiness.' I feel as if I were walking on the edge of a 
precipice, towards which thousands are crowding, and endeavoring 
to plunge me into the abyss. William and Justine were assassinated, and the murderer escapes ! he walks about the world free, and 
perhaps respected. But even if I were condemned to sufier on the 
scafold for the same crimes, I would not change places with such a 
wretch." 

I listened to this discourse with the extremest agony. I, not in 
deed, but in effect, was the true murderer. Elizabeth read my anguish in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand said, "My 
dearest cousin, you must calm yourself. These events have aftected 
me, God knows how deeply; but I am not so wretched as you are. 
There is an expression of despair, and sometimes of revenge, in 
your countenance, that makes me tremble. Be calm, my dear Victor; I would sacrifice my life to your peace. We surely shall be 
happy : quiet in our native country, and not mingling in the world, 
what can disturb our tranquillity?" 

She shed tears as she said this, distrusting the very solace that 



74 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

she gave; but at the same time she smiled, that she might chase 
away the fiend that lurked in my heart. My father, who saw in the 
unhappiness that was painted in my face only an exaggeration of 
that sorrow which I might naturally feel, thought an amusement 
suited to my taste would be the best means of restoring me to my 
wonted serenity. It was from this cause that he had removed to 
the country, and, induced by the same motive, he now proposed 
that we should all make an excursion to the valley of the Chamonix. I had been there before, but Elizabeth and Ernest never had ; 
and both had often expressed an earnest desire to see the scenery 
of the place, which had been described to them as so wonderful 
and sublime. Accordingly we departed from Geneva on this tour 
about the middle of the month of August, nearly two months after 
the death of Justine. 

The weather was uncommonly fine; and if mine had been a 
sorrow to be chased away by any fleeting circumstance, this excursion would certainly have had the effect intended by my father. 
As it was, I was somewhat interested in the scene; it sometimes 
lulled, although it could not extinguish my grief. During the first 
day we travelled in a carriage. In the morning we had seen the 
mountains at a distance, towards which we gradually advanced. 
We perceived that the valley through which we wound, and which 
was formed by the river Arve, whose course we followed, closed in 
upon us by degrees ; and when the sun had set, we beheld immense 
mountains and precipices overhanging us on every side, and heard 
the sound of the river raging among rocks, and the dashing of 
waterfalls around. 

The next day we pursued our journey upon mules ; and as we 
ascended still higher, the valley assumed a more magnificent and 
astonishing character. Ruined castles hanging on the precipices 
of piny mountains ; the impetuous Arve, and cottages every here 
and there peeping forth from among the trees, formed a scene of 
singular beauty. But it was augmented and rendered sublime by 
the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes 
towered above all, as belonging to another earth, the habitations 
of another race of beings. 

We passed the bridge of Pelissier, where the ravine, which the 
river forms, opened before us, and we began to ascend the mountain 
that overhangs it. Soon after we entered the valley of Chamonix. This valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and picturesque as that of Servox, through which we had just 
passed. The high and snowy mountains were its immediate 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 75 

boundaries ; but we saw no more ruined castles and fertile fields. 
Immense glaciers approached the road; we heard the rumbling 
thunder of the falling avalanche, and marked the smoke of its 
passage. Mont Blanc, the supreme and magnificent Mont Blanc, 
raised itself from the surrounding aiguilles and its tremendous 
do7ne overlooked the valley. 

During this journey, I sometimes joined Elizabeth, and exerted 
myself to point out to her the various beauties of the scene. I 
often suffered my mule to lag behind, and indulged in the misery 
of reflection. At other times I spurred on the animal before my 
companions, that I might forget them, the world, and, more than 
all, myself. When at a distance, I alighted, and flirew myself on 
the grass, weighed down by horror and despair. At eight in the 
evening I arrived at Chamonix. My father and Elizabeth were 
very much fatigued; Ernest, who accompanied us, was delighted, 
and in high spirits : the only circumstance that detracted from his 
pleasure was the south wind, and the rain it seemed to promise for 
the next day. 

We retired early to our apartments, but not to sleep; at least I 
did not. I remained many hours at the window, watching the pallid 
lightning that played above Mont Blanc, and listening to the rushing of the Arve, which ran below my window. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE next day, contrary to the prognostications of our guide, 
was fine, although clouded. We visited the source of the 
Arveiron, and rode about the valley until evening. These sublime 
and magnificent scenes afforded me the greatest consolation that I 
was capable of receiving. They elevated me from all littleness of 
feeling; and although they did not remove my grief, they subdued 
and tranquillized it. In some degree, also, they diverted my mind 
from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the last month. 
I returned in the evening, fatigued, but less unhappy, and conversed with my family with more cheerfulness than had been my 
custom for some time. My father was pleased, and Elizabeth over


76 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

jojed.My dear cousin," said she, ''you see what happiness you 
diffuse when you are happy; do not relapse again ! " 

The following morning the rain poured down in torrents, and 
thick mists hid the summits of the mountains. The rain depressed 
me; my old feelings recurred, and I was miserable. I knew how 
disappointed my father would be at this sudden change, and I 
wished to avoid him until I had recovered myself so far as to be 
enabled to conceal those feelings that overpowered me. I knew 
that they would remain that day at the inn; and as I had ever 
inured myself to rain, moisture, and cold, I resolved to go alone to 
the summit of Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view 
of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my 
mind when I first saw it. It had then filled me with a sublime 
ecstasy that gave wings to the soul, and allowed it to soar from the 
obscure world to light and joy. The sight of the awful and majestic 
in nature had indeed always the effect of solemnizing my mind, 
and causing me to forget the passing cares of life. I determined to 
go alone, for I was well acquainted with the path, and the presence 
of another would destroy the solemn grandeur of the scene. 

The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and 
short windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity 
of the mountain. It is a scene terrifically desolate. In a thousand spots the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, 
where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground ; some entirely 
destroyed, others bent, leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain, or transversely upon other trees. The path, as you ascend 
higher, is intersected by ravines of snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is particularly dangerous, as 
the slightest sound, such as even speaking in a loud voice, produces 
a concussion of air sufficient to draw destruction upon the head of 
the speaker. The pines are not tall or luxuriant, but they are 
sombre, and add an air of severity to the scene. I looked on the 
valley beneath ; vast mists were rising from the rivers which ran 
through it, and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain 
poured from the dark sky, and added to the melancholy impression 
I received from the objects around me. Alas ! why does man boast 
of sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only 
renders them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger, thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but 
now we are moved by every wind that blows, and a chance word or 
scene that that word may convey to us. 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 77 

" We rest ; a dream has power to poison slefep. 

We rise ; one wand'ring thought pollutes the day. 
We feel, conceive, or reason ; laugh, or weep, 

Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away ; 
It is the same ; for, be it joy or sorrow, 

The path of its departure still is free. 
Man's yesterday may ne'er be like his morrow ; 

Nought may endure but mutability." 

It was nearly noon when I arrived at the top of the ascent. For 
some time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. A mist 
covered both that and the surrounding mountains. Presently a 
breeze dissipated the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier. The 
surface is very uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, 
descendirg low, and interspersed by rifts that sink deep. The field 
of ice is almost a league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in 
crossing it. The opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. 
From the side where I now stood Montanvert was exactly opposite, 
at the distance of a league ; and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful 
majesty. I remained in a recess of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene. The sea, or rather the vast river of ice, 
wound among its dependent mountains, whose aerial summits 
hung over its recesses. Their icy and glittering peaks shone in 
the sunlight over the clouds. My heart, which was before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; I exclaimed  " Wandering spirits, if ye indeed wander, and do not rest in your narrow 
beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me as your companion, 
away from the joys of life." 

As I said this, I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some 
distance, advancing towards me with superhuman speed. He 
bounded over the crevices of the ice, among which I had walked 
with caution ; his stature also, as he approached, seemed to exceed 
that of man. 

I was troubled : a mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faintness 
seize me ; but I was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains. I perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous 
and abhorred!), that it was the wretch whom I had created. I 
trembled with rage and horror, resolving to wait his approach, and 
then close with him in mortal combat. He approached ; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish, combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness rendered it almost too horrible for 
human eyes. But I scarcely observed this ; anger and hatred had at 
first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm 
him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. 



78 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 
 Devil !" I exclaimed, ' do you dare approach me? and do you 
not fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable 
head? Begone, vile insect! or rather stay, that I may trample you 
to dust! and, oh, that I could, with the extinction of your miserable 
existence, restore those victims whom you have so diabolically 
murdered ! '' 
I expected this reception," said the demon. ''All men hate 
the wretched ; how then must I be hated, who am miserable beyond 
all living things ! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy 
creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the 
annihilation of one of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you 
sport thus with life? Do your duty towards me, and I will do 
mine towards you and the rest of mankind. If you will comply 
with my conditions, I will leave them and you at peace ; but if you 
refuse, I will glut the maw of death, until it be satisfied with the 
blood of your remaining friends." 

''Abhorred monster! fiend that thou art! the tortures of hell are 
too mild a vengeance for thy crimes. Wretched devil ! you reproach me with your creation ; come on then, that I may extinguish 
the spark which I so negligently bestowed." 

My rage was without bounds ; I sprang on him, impelled by all the 
feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another. 

He easily eluded me, and said,  

"Be calm! I entreat you to hear me, before you give vent to 
your hatred on my devoted head. Have I not suffered enough, 
that you seek to increase my misery? Life, although it may only 
be an accumulation of anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it. 
Remember, thou hast made me more powerful than thyself; my 
height is superior to thine ; my joints more supple. But I will not 
be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee. I am thy creature, 
and I will be even mild and docile to my natural lord and king, if 
thou wilt also perform thy part, the which thou owest me. Oh, 
Frankenstein, be not equitable to every other, and trample upon me 
alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy clemency and afiection, is 
most due. Remember, that I am thy creature : I ought to be thy 
Adam ; but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from 
joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I alone 
am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent and good ; miserj made 
me a fiend. Make me happy, and I shall again be virtuous." 

"Begone! I will not hear you. There can be no community 
between you and me ; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our 
strength in a fight, in which one must fall." 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 79 
 How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a 
favorable eye upon thy creature, who implores thj goodness and 
compassion? Believe me, Frankenstein: I was benevolent; my 
soul glowed with love and humanity : but am I not alone, miserably 
alone? You, my creator, abhor me; what hope can I gather from 
your fellow-creatures, who owe me nothing? They spurn and hate 
me. The desert mountains and dreary glaciers are my refuge. I 
have wandered here many days ; the caves of ice, which I only do 
not fear, are a dwelling to me, and the only one which man does not 
grudge. These bleak skies I hail, for they are kinder to me than 
your fellow-beings. If the multitude of mankind knew of my 
existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for my 
destruction. Shall I not then hate them who abhor me? I will 
keep no terms with my enemies. I am miserable, and they shall 
share my wretchedness. Yet it is in your power to recompense me, 
and deliver them from an evil which it only remains for you to 
make so great, that not only you and your family, but thousands 
of others, shall be swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage. 
Let your compassion be moved, and do not disdain me. Listen to 
my tale : when you have heard that, abandon or commiserate me, 
as you shall judge that I deserve. But hear me. The guilty are 
allowed, by human laws, bloody as they may be, to speak in their 
own defence, before they are condemned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder; and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal 
justice of man ! Yet I ask you not to spare me : listen to me ; and 
then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands." 

''Why do 3ou call to my remembrance circumstances of which I 
shudder to reflect that I have been the miserable origin and author? 
Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! 
Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you! 
You have made me wretched beyond expression. You have left me 
no power to consider whether I am just to you or not. Begone! 
relieve me from the sight of your detested form." 

"Thus I relieve thee, my creator," he said, and placed his hated 
hand before my eyes, which I flung from me with violence; "thus 
I take from thee a sight which you abhor. Still thou canst listen 
to me, and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once 
possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and 
strange, and the temperature of this place is not fitting to your 
fine sensations; come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is 
yet high in the heavens ; before it descends to hide itself behind 



So 



FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 



yon snowy precipices, and illuminate another world, you will have 
heard my story, and can decide. On you it rests, whether I quit 
for ever the neighborhood of man, and lead a harmless life, or become a scourge to your fellow-creatures, and the author of your 
own speedy ruin." 

As he said this, he led the way across the ice : I followed. My 
heart was full, and I did not answer him ; but, as I proceeded, I 
weighed the various arguments that he had used, and determined 
at least to listen to his tale. I was partly urged by curiosity, and 
compassion confirmed my resolution. I had hitherto supposed 
him to be the murderer of my brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion. For the first time, also, I felt 
what the duties of a creator towards his creature were, and that I 
ought to render him happy before I complained of his wickedness. 
These motives urged me to comply with his demand. We crossed 
the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite rock. The air was 
cold, and the rain again began to descend : we entered the hut, the 
fiend with an air of exultation, I with a heavy heart and depressed 
spirits. But I consented to listen ; and, seating myself by the fire 
which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began his tale. 



CHAPTER X. 

'' TT is with considerable difficulty that I remember the original 
- era of my being : all the events of that period appear confused 
and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and 
I saw, felt, heard, and smelt, at the same time; and it was, indeed, 
a long time before I learned to distinguish between the operations 
of my various senses. By degrees, I remember, a stronger light 
pressed upon my nerves, so that I was obliged to shut my eyes. 
Darkness then came over me, and troubled me; but hardly had I 
felt this, when, by opening my eyes, as I now suppose, the light 
poured in upon me again. I walked, and, I believe, descended ; but 
I presently found a great alteration in my sensations. Before, dark 
and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or 
sight ; but I now found that I could wander on at liberty, with no 
obstacles which I could not either surmount or avoid. The light 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 8l 

became more and more oppressive to me ; and, the heat wearying 
me as I walked, I sought a place where I could receive shade. This 
was the forest near Ingolstadt ; and here I laj by the side of a brook 
resting from my fatigue, until I felt tormented by hunger and thirst. 
This roused me from my nearly dormant state, and I ate some berries which I found hanging on the trees, or lying on the ground. 
I slaked my thirst at the brook ; and then, lying down, was overcome 
by sleep. 
'It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half-frightened, 
as it were instinctively, finding myself so desolate. Before I had 
quitted your apartment, on a sensation of cold, I had covered myself with some clothes ; but these were insufficient to secure me from 
the dews of night. I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch ; I 
knew and could distinguish nothing; but, feeling pain invade me 
on all sides, I sat down and wept. 

'' Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens, and gave me a sensation of pleasure. I started up, and beheld a radiant form rise 
from among the trees. I gazed with a kind of wonder. It moved 
slowly, but it enlightened my path ; and I again went out in search 
of berries. I was still cold, when under one of the trees I found a 
huge cloak, with which I covered myself, and sat down upon the 
ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind ; all was confused. 
I felt light and hunger and thirst and darkness; innumerable 
sounds rung in my ears, and on all sides various scents saluted 
me : the only object that I could distinguish was the bright moon, 
and I fixed my eyes on that with pleasure. 

'' Several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night 
had greatly lessened, when I began to distinguish my sensations 
from each other. I gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied me with drink, and the trees that shaded me with their foliage. 
I was delighted when I first discovered that a pleasant sound, which 
often saluted my ears, proceeded from the throats of the little 
winged animals who had often intercepted the light from my eyes. 
I began also to observe, with greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded me, and to perceive the boundaries of the radiant roof of 
light which canopied me. Sometimes I tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds, but was unable. Sometimes I wished to 
express my sensations in my own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into silence 
again. 
'The moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with a 
lessened form, showed itself, while I still remained, in the forest. 

6 



82 



FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 



My sensations had, by this time, become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to 
the light, and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and, by degrees, one herb from 
another. I found that the sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, 
while those of the blackbird and thrush were sweet and enticing. 

" One day, when I was oppressed by cold, I found a fire which 
had been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with 
delight at the warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my 
hand into the live embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry 
of pain. How strange, I thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects ! I examined the materials of the fire, 
and to my joy found it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected 
some branches; but they were wet, and would not burn. I was 
pained at this, and sat still watching the operation of the fire. 
The wet wood which I had placed near the heat dried, and itself 
became inflamed. I reflected on this; and, by touching the various 
branches, I discovered the cause, and busied myself in collecting a 
great quantity of wood, that I might dry it, and have a plentiful 
supply of fire. When night came on, and brought sleep with it, I 
was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. I covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves, and placed wet branches 
upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, I lay on the ground, and 
sunk into sleep. 
' It was morning when I awoke, and my first care was to visit the 
fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a 
flame. I observed this also, and contrived a fan of branches, which 
roused the embers when they were nearly extinguished. When 
night came again, I found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as 
well as heat; and that the discovery of this element was useful to 
me in my food; for I found some of the offals that the travellers 
had left had been roasted, and tasted much more savory than the 
berries I gathered from the trees. I tried, therefore, to dress my 
food in the same manner, placing it on the live embers. I found 
that the berries were spoiled by this operation, and the nuts and 
roots much improved. 

''Food, however, became scarce; and I often spent the whole day 
searching in vain for a few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger. 
When I found this, I resolved to quit the place that I had hitherto 
inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would 
be more easily satisfied. In this emigration, I exceedingly lamented 
the loss of the fire which I had obtained through accident, and 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 83 

knew not how to reproduce it. I gave several hours to the serious 
consideration of this difficulty; but I was obliged to relinquish all 
attempts to supply it; and, wrapping myself up in my cloak, I 
struck across the wood towards the setting sun. I passed three 
days in these rambles, and at length discovered the open country. 
A great fall of snow had taken place the night before, and the fields 
were of one uniform white ; the appearance was disconsolate, and I 
found my feet chilled by the cold damp substance that covered the 
ground. 

'' It was about seven in the morning, and I longed to obtain food 
and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, 
which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a new sight to me ; and I examined the structure 
with great curiosity. Finding the door open, I entered. An old 
man sat in it, near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast. 
He turned on hearing a noise; and, perceiving me, shrieked loudly, 
and, quitting the hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which 
his debilitated form hardly appeared capable. His appearance, 
different from any I had ever before seen, and his flight, somewhat 
surprised me. But I was enchanted by the appearance of the hut: 
here the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; 
and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine a retreat as 
Pandemonium appeared to the demons of hell after their sufferings 
in the lake of fire. I greedily devoured the remnants of the shepherd's breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; 
the latter, however, I did not like. Overcome by fatigue, I lay down 
among some straw, and fell asleep. 
It was noon when I awoke; and, allured by the warmth of the 
sun, which shone brightly on the white ground, I determined to recommence my travels ; and, depositing the remains of the peasant's 
breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at a village. How miraculous 
did this appear! the huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses, 
engaged my admiration by turns. The vegetables in the gardens, 
the milk and cheese that I saw placed at the windows of some of 
the cottages, allured my appetite. One of the best of these I entered ; but I had hardly placed my foot within the door, before the 
children shrieked, and one of the women fainted. The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously 
bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country, and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel, 
quite bare, and making a wretched appearance after the palaces I 



84 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

had beheld in the village. This hovel, however, joined a cottage 
of a neat and pleasant appearance ; but, after my late dearly bought 
experience, I dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed 
of wood, but so low, that I could with difficulty sit upright in it. 
No wood, however, was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, 
but it was dry; and although the wind entered it by innumerable 
chinks, I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain. 

'' Here then I retreated, and lay down, happy to have found a 
shelter, however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and 
still more from the barbarity of man. 

"As soon as morning dawned, I crept from my kennel, that I 
might view the adjacent cottage, and discover if I could remain in 
the habitation I had found. It was situated against the back of the 
cottage, and surrounded on the sides which were exposed by a pigsty and a clear pool of water. One part was open, and by that I 
had crept in ; but now I covered every crevice by which I might be 
perceived with stones and wood, yet in such a manner that I might 
move them on occasion to pass out : all the light I enjoyed came 
through the sty, and that was sufficient for me. 

" Having thus arranged my dwelling, and carpeted it with clean 
straw, I retired ; for I saw the figure of a man at a distance, and I 
remembered too well my treatment the night before, to trust myself 
in his power. I had first, however, provided for my sustenance for 
that day, by a loaf of coarse bread, which I purloined, and a cup 
with which I could drink, more conveniently than from my hand, 
of the pure water which flowed by my retreat. The floor was a little raised, so that it was kept perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the 
chimney of the cottage it was tolerably warm. 

"Being thus provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel, until 
something should occur which might alter my determination. It 
was indeed a paradise, compared to the bleak forest,  my former residence,  the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. I ate my 
breakfast with pleasure, and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little water, when I heard a step, and, looking through 
a small chink, I beheld a young creature, with a pail on her head, 
passing before my hovel. The girl was young and of gentle demeanor, unlike what I have since found cottagers and farm-servants 
to be. Yet she was meanly dressed, a coarse blue petticoat and a 
linen jacket being her only garb ; her fair hair was plaited, but not 
adorned; she looked patient, yet sad. I lost sight of her; and in 
about Tl quarter of an hour she returned, bearing the pail, which 
was now partly filled with milk. As she walked along, seemingly 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 85 

incommoded by the burden, a young man met herwhose countenance expressed a deeper despondence. Uttering a few sounds with 
an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head, and bore it to 
the cottage himself. She followed, and they disappeared. Presently I saw the young man again, with some tools in his hand, 
cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, 
sometimes in the house, and sometimes in the yard. 

'On examining my little dwelling, I found that one of the windows of the cottage had formerly occupied a part of it, but the 
panes had been filled up with wood. In one of these was a small 
and almost imperceptible chink, through which the eye could just 
penetrate. Through this crevice, a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean, but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near 
a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The young girl was occupied in arranging the 
cottage ; but presently she took something out of a drawer, which 
employed her hands, and she sat down beside the old man, who, 
taking up an instrument, began to play, and to produce sounds, 
sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the nightingale. It was a 
lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch ! who had never beheld aught 
beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of 
the aged cottager won my reverence ; while the gentle manners of 
the girl enticed my love. He played a sweet mournful air, which I 
perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion, of 
which the old man took no notice, until she sobbed audibly; he 
then pronounced a few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her 
work, knelt at his feet. He raised her, and smiled with such kindness and affection, that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature : they were a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as 
I had never before experienced, either from hunger or cold, warmth 
or food ; and I withdrew from the window, unable to bear these 
emotions. 

''Soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a load of wood. The girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of his burden, and, taking some of the fuel into the 
cottage, placed it on the fire ; then she and the youth went apart 
into a nook of the cottage, and he showed her a large loaf and a 
piece of cheese. She seemed pleased ; and went into the garden 
for some roots and plants, which she placed in water, and then 
upon the fire. She afterwards continued her work, while the young 
man went into the garden, and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling up roots. After he had been employed thus about 



86 



FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 



an hour, the j'oung woman joined him, and they entered the cottage 
together. 
'The old man had, in the mean time, been pensive; but, on the 
appearance of his companions, he assumed a more cheerful air, and 
they sat down to eat. The 'meal was quickly despatched. The 
young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage; the 
old man walked before the cottage in the sun for a few minutes, 
leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty 
the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, 
with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and 
love : the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry; yet his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man 
returned to the cottage; and the youth, with tools diflferent from 
those he had used in the morning, directed his steps across the 
fields. 
' Night quickly shut in ; but, to my extreme wonder, I found that 
the cottagers had a means of prolonging light, by the use of tapers, 
and was delighted to find, that the setting of the sun did not put an 
end to the pleasure I experienced in watching my human neighbors. 
In the evening, the young girl and her companion were employed 
in various occupations which I did not understand ; and the old 
man again took up the instrument which produced the divine 
sounds that had enchanted me in the morning. So soon as he had 
finished, the youth began, not to play, but to utter sounds that were 
monotonous, and neither resembling the harmony of the old man's 
instrument nor the songs of the birds : I since found that he read 
aloud, but at that time I knew nothing of the science of words or 
letters. 

''The family, after having been thus occupied for a short time, 
extinguished their lights, and retired, as I conjectured, to rest. 



CHAPTER XI. 
 T LAY on my straw, but I could not sleep. I thought of the 
- occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle 
manners of these people; and I longed to join them, but dared not. 
I remembered too well the treatment I had suffered the night before 
from the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of con


THE MODERN PROMETHEUS.   7 



duct I might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present 
I would remain quietly in my hovel, watching, and endeavoring to 
discover the motives which influenced their actions. 
'The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. The 
young woman arranged the cottage, and prepared the food ; and the 
youth departed after the first meal. 
'This day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded 
it. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the 
girl in various laborious occupations within. The old man, whom 
I soon perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his 
instrument, or in contemplation. Nothing could exceed the love 
and respect which the younger cottagers exhibited towards their 
venerable companion. They performed towards him every little 
office of affection and duty with gentleness ; and he rewarded them 
by his benevolent smiles. 

"They were not entirely happy. The young man and his companion often went apart, and appeared to weep. I saw no cause 
for their unhappiness ; but I was deeply affected by it. If such 
lovely creatures were miserable, it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were 
these gentle beings unhappy. They possessed a delightful house 
(for such it was in my eyes), and every luxury; they had a fire to 
warm them when chill, and delicious viands when hungry; they 
were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more, they enjoyed one 
another's company and speech, interchanging each day looks of 
affection and kindness. What did their tears imply? Did they 
really express pain? I was at first unable to solve these questions; 
but perpetual attention, and time, explained to me many appearances which were at first enigmatic. 

"A considerable period elapsed before I discovered one of the 
causes of the uneasiness of this amiable family : it was poverty ; 
and they suffered that evil in a very distressing degree. Their 
nourishment consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden, 
and the milk of one cow, that gave very little during the winter, 
when its masters could scarcely procure food to support it. They 
often, I believe, suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, 
especially the two younger cottagers ; for several times they placed 
food before the old man, when they reserved none for themselves. 

''This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been accustomed, during the night, to steal a part of their store for my 
own consumption; but when I found that in doing this I inflicted 



88 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

pain on the cottagers, I abstained, and satisfied myself with berries, 
nuts, and roots, which I gathered from a neighboring wood. 
' I discovered also another means through which I was enabled 
to assist their labors. I found that the youth spent a great part of 
each day in collecting wood for the family fire; and during the 
night, I often took his tools, the use of which I quickly discovered, 
and brought home firing sufficient for the consumption of several 
days. 

"I remember, that, the first time I did this, the young woman, 
when she opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly 
astonished on seeing a great pile of wood on the outside. She 
uttered some words in a loud voice, and the youth joined her, 
who also expressed surprise. I observed, with pleasure, that he did 
not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage, 
and cultivating the garden. 
' By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found 
that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to one another by articulate sounds. I perceived that the words they spoke produced either pleasure or pain, 
smiles or sadness, in the minds and countenances of the hearers. 
This was indeed a godlike science, and I ardently desired to become acquainted with it. But I was baffled in every attempt I made 
for this purpose. Their pronunciation was quick; and the words 
they uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible 
objects, I was unable to discover any clew by which I could unravel 
the mystery of their reference. By great application, however, 
and after having remained during the space of several revolutions 
of the moon in my hovel, I discovered the names that were given 
to some of the most familiar objects of discourse : I learned and 
applied the words fire milk breads and zvood. I learned also the 
names of the cottagers themselves. The youth and his companion 
had each of them several names, but the old man had only one, 
which w2iS> father. The girl was called sister or Agatha ; and the 
youth Felix brother or son. I cannot describe the delight I felt 
when I learned the ideas appropriated to each of these sounds, and 
was able to pronounce them. I distinguished several other words, 
without being able as yet to understand or apply them ; such as 
good., dearest unhappy, z 

I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners and 
beauty of the cottagers greatly endeared them to me : when they 
were unhappy, I felt depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathized 
in their joys. I saw few human beings beside them; and if any 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 89 

other happened to enter the cottage, their harsh manners and rude 
gait onlj enhanced to me the superior accomplishments of my 
friends. The old man, I could perceive, often endeavored to encourage his children, as sometimes I found that he called them, to 
cast off their melancholy. He would talk in a cheerful accent, with 
an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me. 
Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, 
which she endeavored to wipe away unperceived ; but I generally 
found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the exhortations of her father. It was not thus with 
Felix. He was always the saddest of the group; and, even to my 
unpractised senses, he appeared to have suffered more deeply than 
his friends. But, if his countenance were more sorrowful, his voice 
was more cheerful than that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man. 

"I could mention innumerable instances, which, although slight, 
marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst 
of poverty and want, Felix carried with pleasure to his sister the 
first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy 
ground. Early in the morning, before she had risen, he cleared 
away the snow that obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew 
water from the well, and brought the wood from the out-house, 
where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always 
replenished by an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked 
sometimes for a neighboring farmer, because he often went forth, 
and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood with him. 
At other times he worked in the garden; but, as there was little to 
do in the frosty season, he read to the old man and Agatha. 
This reading had puzzled me extremely at first; but, by degrees, I discovered that he uttered many of the same sounds when 
he read as when he talked. I conjectured, therefore, that he found 
on the paper signs for speech which he understood, and I ardently 
longed to comprehend these also; but how was that possible, 
when I did not even understand the sounds for which they stood 
as signs . I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not 
sufficiently to follow up any kind of conversation, although I 
applied my whole mind to the endeavor : for I easily perceived, 
that, although I eagerly longed to discover myself to the cottagers, 
I ought not to make the attempt until I had first become master of 
their language; which knowledge might enable me to make them 
overlook the deformity of my figure ; for with this also the contrast 
perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted. 



90 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 
'I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers,  their grace, 
beauty, and delicate complexions ; but how was I terrified when I 
viewed myself in a transparent pool ! At first I started back, unable 
to believe that it was indeed I who was reflected in the mirror; 
and when I became fully convinced that I was in reality the monster 
that I am, I was filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence 
and mortification. Alas! I did not yet entirely know the fatal 
eflfects of this miserable deformity. 

"As the sun became warmer, and the light of day longer, the 
snow vanished, and I beheld the bare trees and the black earth. 
From this time Felix was more employed ; and the heart-moving 
indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I 
afterwards found, was coarse, but it was wholesome ; and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several new kinds of plants sprung up in 
the garden, which they dressed ; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season advanced. 
'The old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, 
when it did not rain, as I found it was called when the heavens 
poured forth its waters. This frequently took place ; but a high 
wind quickly dried the earth, and the season became far more 
pleasant than it had been. 
My mode of life in my hovel was uniform. During the morning I attended the motions of the cottagers ; and when they were 
dispersed in various occupations, I slept : the remainder of the day 
was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired to rest, 
if there was any moon, or the night was star-light, I went into the 
woods, and collected my own food and fuel for the cottage. When 
I returned, as often as it was necessary I cleared their path from 
the snow, and performed those offices that I had seen done by 
Felix. I afterwards found that these labors, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them ; and once or twice I heard 
them, on these occasions, utter the words good spirit wo7iderful ; 
but I did not then understand the signification of these terms. 

"My thoughts now became more active, and I longed to discover 
the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive 
to know why Felix appeared so miserable, and Agatha so sad. I 
thought (foolish wretch !) that it might be in my power to restore 
happiness to these deserving people. When I slept, or was absent, 
the forms of the venerable blind father, the gentle Agatha, and the 
excellent Felix, flitted before me. I looked upon them as superior 
beings, who would be the arbiters of my future destiny. I formed 
in my imagination a thousand pictures of presenting myself to 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 9I 

them, and their reception of me. I imagined that they would be 
disgusted, until bj my gentle demeanor and conciliating words, I 
should first win their favor, and afterwards their love. 
' These thoughts exhilarated me, and led me to apply with fresh' 
ardor to the acquiring the art of language. My organs were indeed harsh, but supple; and, although my voice was very unlike 
the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as I 
understood, with tolerable ease. It was as the ass and the lap-dog; 
yet surely the gentle ass, whose intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved better treatment than blows 
and execration. 
'The pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly 
altered the aspect of the earth. Men, who before this change 
seemed to have been hid in caves, dispersed themselves, and were 
employed ii various arts of cultivation. The birds sang in more 
cheerful notes, and the leaves began to bud forth on the trees. 
Happy, happy earth! fit habitation for gods, which, so short a 
time before, was bleak, damp, and unwholesome. My spirits were 
elevated by the enchanting appearance of nature ; the past was 
blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil, and the future 
gilded by bright rays of hope, and anticipations of joy. 



CHAPTER XII. 
 T NOW hasten to the more moving part of my story. I shall 
- relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what 
I was, have made me what I am. 

"Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine, and the 
skies cloudless. It surprised me, that what before was desert and 
gloomy should now bloom with the most beautiful flowers and 
verdure. My senses were gratified and refreshed by a thousand 
scents of delight, and a thousand sights of beauty. 
'It was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically 
rested from labor,  the old man played on his guitar, and the 
children listened to him,  I observed that the countenance of Felix 
was melancholy beyond expression: he sighed frequently; and 
once his father paused in his music, and I conjectured by his manner that he inquired the cause of his son's sorrow. Felix replied in 



92 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

a cheerful accent, and the old man was recommencing his music, 
when some one tapped at the door. 
It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a countryman as a 
guide. The lady was dressed in a dark suit, and covered with a 
thick black veil. Agatha asked a question; to which the stranger 
only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of Felix. 
Her voice was musical, but unlike that of either of my friends. On 
hearing this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady; who, when 
she saw him, threw up her veil, and I beheld a countenance of 
angelic beauty and expression. Her hair of a shining raven black, 
and curiously braided; her eyes were dark, but gentle, although 
animated ; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion 
wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely tint. 
' Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw her, every 
trait of sorrow vanished from his face, and it instant |xpressed a 
degree of ecstatic joy, of which I could hardly have believed it 
capable ; his eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure ; and 
at that moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She 
appeared affected by different feelings ; wiping a few tears from her 
lovely eyes, she held out her hand to Felix, who kissed it rapturously, and called her, as well as I could distinguish, his sweet 
Arabian. She did not appear to understand him, but smiled. He 
assisted her to dismount, and, dismissing her guide, conducted her 
into the cottage. Some conversation took place between him and 
his father; and the young stranger knelt at the old man's feet, and 
would have kissed his hand, but he raised her, and embraced her 
affectionately. 
'I soon perceived, that, although the stranger uttered articulate 
sounds, and appeared to have a language of her own, she was 
neither understood by, nor herself understood, the cottagers. They 
made many signs which I did not comprehend ; but I saw that her 
presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their 
sorrow as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed 
peculiarly happy, and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. 
Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of the lovely 
stranger; and, pointing to her brother, made signs which appeared 
to me to mean that he had been sorrowful until she came. Some 
hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances, expressed joy, 
the cause of which I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by 
the frequent recurrence of one sound which the stranger repeated 
after them, that she was endeavoring to learn their language ; and 
the idea instantly occurred to me, that I should make use of the 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 93 

same instructions to the same end. The stranger learned about 
twenty words at the first lesson ; most of them indeed were those 
which I had before understood, but I profited by the others. 

''As night came on, Agatha and the Arabian retired early. 
When they separated, Felix kissed the hand of the stranger, and 
said, Good-night, sweet Safie.' He sat up much longer, conversing 
with his father; and, by the frequent repetition of her name, I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of their conversation. I ardently desired to understand them, and bent every faculty 
towards that purpose, but found it utterly impossible. 

The next morning Felix went out to his work; and, after the 
usual occupations of Agatha were finished, the Arabian sat at the 
feet of the old man, and, taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly beautiful, that they at once drew tears of sorrow and 
delight from my eyes. She sang, and her voice flowed in a rich 
cadence, swelling or dying away, like a nightingale of the woods. 
'When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha, who at 
first declined it. She played a simple air, and her voice accompanied it in sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the 
stranger. The old man appeared enraptured, and said some words, 
which Agatha endeavored to explain to Safie, and by which he appeared to wish to express that she bestowed on. him the greatest 
delight by her music. 

'' The days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole alteration, that joy had taken the place of sadness in the countenances of 
my friends. Safie was always gay and happy; she and I improved 
rapidly in the knowledge of language, so that in two months I began to comprehend most of the words uttered by my protectors. 

'' In the mean while also, the black ground was covered with herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, 
sweet to the scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the 
moonlight woods ; the sun became warmer, the nights clear and 
balmy; and my nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, 
although they were considerably shortened by the late setting and 
early rising of the sun ; for I never ventured abroad during daylight, fearful of meeting with the same treatment as I had formerly 
endured in the first village which I entered. 

"My days were spent in close attention that I might more speedily master the language; and I may boast that I improved more 
rapid than the Arabian, who understood very little, and conversed 
in broken accents, while I comprehended and could imitate almost 
every word that was spoken. 



94 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

"While I improved in speech, I also learned the science of letters, 
as it was taught to the stranger; and this opened before me a wide 
field for wonder and delight. 

" The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney's ' Ruins 
of Empires.' I should not have understood the purport of this book, 
had not Felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations. He 
had chosen this work, he said, because the declamatory style was 
framed in imitation of the eastern authors. Through this work I 
obtained a cursory knowledge of history, and a view of the several 
empires at present existing in the world ; it gave me an insight into 
the manners, governments, and religions of the different nations of 
the earth. I heard of the slothful Asiatics; of the stupendous 
genius and mental activity of the Grecians; of the wars and 
wonderful virtue of the early Romans,  of their subsequent degeneration,  of the decline of that mighty empire ; of chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard of the discovery of the American 
hemisphere, and wept with Safie over the hapless fate of its original 
inhabitants. 
 These wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings. 
Was man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous, and magnificent, 
yet so vicious and base.' He appeared at one time a mere scion of 
evil principle, and at another as all that can be conceived of noble 
and godlike. To be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest 
honor that can befall a sensitive being ; to be base and vicious, as 
many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. 
For a long time I could not conceive how one man could go forth 
to murder his fellow, or even why there were laws and governments ; but when I heard details of vice and bloodshed, my wonder 
ceased, and I hurried away with disgust and loathing. 
' Every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders 
to me. While I listened to the instructions which Felix bestowed 
upon the Arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. I heard of the division of property, of immense 
wealth and squalid poverty; of rank, descent, and noble blood. 

''The words induced me to turn towards myself. I learned that 
the possessions most esteemed by your fellow-creatures were high 
and unsullied descent united with riches. A man might be respected 
with only one of these acquisitions ; but without either he was considered, except in very rare instances, as a vagabond and a slave, 
doomed to waste his powers for the profit of the chosen few. And 
what was I ? Of my creation and creator I was absolutely ignorant ; 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 95 

but I knew that I possessed no money, no friends, no kind of property. I was, besides, endowed with a figure hideously deformed 
and loathsome; I was not even of the same nature as man. I was 
more agile than they, and could subsist upon coarser diet; I bore 
the extremes of heat and cold with less injury to my frame ; my 
stature far exceeded theirs. When I looked around, I saw and 
heard of none like me. Was I then a monster, a blot upon the 
earth, from which all men fled, and whom all men disowned? 

'' I cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted 
upon me; I tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with 
knowledge. Oh, that I had for ever remained in my native wood, 
nor known or felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat! 

" Of what a strange nature is knowledge! It clings to the mind, 
when it has once seized on it, like a lichen on the rock. I wished 
sometimes to shake oif all thought and feeling; but I learned that 
thee was but one means to overcome the sensation of pain, and 
that was death,  a state which I feared, yet did not understand. I 
admired virtue and good feelings, and loved the gentle manners 
and amiable qualities of my cottagers ; but I was shut out from intercourse with them, except through means which I obtained by 
stealth, when I was unseen and unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire I had of becoming one among my 
fellows. The gentle words of Agatha, and the animated smiles of 
the charming Arabian, were not for me. The mild exhortations of 
the old man, and the lively conversation of the loved Felix, were 
not for me. Miserable, unhappy wretch ! 

" Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply. I 
heard of the diference of sexes; of the birth and growth of children ; how the father doated on the smiles of the infant, and the 
lively sallies of the older child; how all the life and cares of the 
mother were wrapped up in the precious charge; how the mind of 
youth expanded and gained knowledge; of brother, sister, and all 
the various relationships which bind one human being to another 
in mutual bonds. 

''But where were my friends and relations.? No father had 
watched my infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and 
caresses ; or, if they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind 
vacancy in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been as I then was in height and proportion. I 
had never yet seen a being resembling me, or who claimed any 
intercourse with me. What was I? The question again recurred, 
to be answered only with groans. 



96 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

" I will soon explain to what these feelings tended ; but allow me 
now to return to the cottagers, whose story excited in me such various feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated in additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so I 
loved, in an innocent, half-painful self-deceit to call them). 



CHAPTER XIII. 
' O OME time elapsed before I learned the history of my friends. 

 It was one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on 
my mind, unfolding as it did a number of circumstances each interesting and wonderful to one so utterly inexperienced as I was. 
'The name of the old man was De Lacey. He was descended 
from a good family in France, where he had lived for many years in 
affluence, respected by his superiors, and beloved by his equals. 
His son was bred in the service of his country; and Agatha had 
ranked with ladies of the highest distinction. A few months before 
my arrival, they had lived in a large and luxurious city, called Paris, 
surrounded by friends, and possessed of every enjoyment which 
virtue, refinement of intellect, or taste, accompanied by a moderate 
fortune, could afford. 

'The father of Safie had been the cause of their ruin. He was a 
Turkish merchant, and had inhabited Paris for many years, when, 
for some reason which I could not learn, he became obnoxious to 
the government. He was seized and cast into prison the very day 
that Safie arrived from Constantinople to join him. He was tried, 
and condemned to death. The injustice of his sentence was very 
flagrant; all Paris was indignant; and it was judged that his religion and wealth, rather than the crime alleged against him, had 
been the cause of his condemnation. 
' Felix had been present at the trial; his horror and indignation 
were uncontrollable, when he heard the decision of the court. He 
made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him, and then 
looked around for the means. After many fruitless attempts to 
gain admittance to the prison, he found a strongly grated window 
in an unguarded part of the building which lighted the dungeon of 
the unfortunate Mahometan ; who, loaded with chains, waited in 
despair the execution of the barbarous sentence. 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 97 
 Felix visited the grate at night, and made known to the prisoner 
his intentions in his favor. The Turk, amazed and delighted, endeavored to kindle the zeal of his deliverer by promises of reward 
and wealth. Felix rejected his offers with contempt; yet when he 
saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit her father, and who, 
by her gestures, expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not 
help owning to his own mind, that the captive possessed a treasure 
which would fully reward his toil and hazard. 

''The Turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter 
had made on the heart of Felix, and endeavored to secure him more 
entirely in his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage, so 
soon as he should be conveyed to a place of safety. Felix was too 
delicate to accept this offer ; yet he looked forward to the probability of that event as to the consummation of his happiness. 
' During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed 
by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found 
means to express her thoughts in the language of her lover by the 
aid of an old man, a servant of her father's, who understood 
French. She thanked him in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her father; and at the same time she gently 
deplored her own fate. 

"I have copies of these letters; for I found means, during my 
residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and 
the letters were often in the hands of Felix or Agatha. Before I 
depart, I will give them to you : they will prove the truth of my 
tale; but at present, as the sun is already far declined, I shall only 
have time to repeat the substance of them to you. 

'' Safie related that her mother was a Christian Arab, seized and 
made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had 
won the heart of the father of Safie, who married her. The young 
girl spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born 
in freedom, spurned the bondage to which she was now reduced. 
She instructed her daughter in the tenets of her religion, and taught 
her to aspire to higher powers of intellect, and an independence of 
spirit, forbidden to the female followers of Mahomet. This lady 
died ; but her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of Safie, 
who sickened at the prospect of again returning to Asia, and the 
being immured within the walls of a harem, allowed only to occupy 
herself with puerile amusements, ill suited to the temper of her 
soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue. The prospect of marrying a Christian, and remaining in a 

7 



98 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

country where women were allowed to take a rank in society, was 
enchanting to her. 
'The day for the execution of the Turk was fixed; but, the night 
previous to it, he had quitted prison, and before morning was distant many leagues from Paris. Felix had procured passports in the 
name of his father, sister, and himself. He had previously communicated his plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting 
his house, under the pretence of a journey, and concealed himself, 
with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris. 

"Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons, and 
across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to 
wait a favorable opportunity of passing into some part of the 
Turkish dominions. 

'' Safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his 
departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that 
she should be united to his deliverer; and Felix remained with 
them in expectation of that event; and in the mean time he enjoyed the society of the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the 
simplest and tenderest affection. They conversed with one another 
through the means of an interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks ; and Safie sang to him the divine airs of her 
native country. 

''The Turk allowed this intimacy to take place, and encouraged 
the hopes of the youthful lovers, while in his heart he had formed 
far other plans. He loathed the idea that his daughter should be 
united to a Christian ; but he feared the resentment of Felix if he 
should appear lukewarm ; for he knew that he was still in the power 
of his deliverer, if he should choose to betray him to the Italian 
state which they inhabited. He revolved a thousand plans by which 
he should be enabled to prolong the deceit until it might be no 
longer necessary, and secretly to take his daughter with him when 
he departed. His plans were greatly facilitated by the news which 
arrived from Paris. 

''The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape 
of their victim, and spared no pains to detect and punish his deliverer. The plot of Felix was quickly discovered, and De Lacey 
and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix, and 
roused him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father, 
and his gentle sister, lay in a noisome dungeon, while he enjoyed 
the free air, and the society of her whom he loved. This idea was 
torture to him. He quickly arranged with the Turk, that if the latter should find a favorable opportunity for escape before Felix could 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 99 

return to Italy, Safie should remain as a boarder at a convent at 
Leghorn ; and then, quitting the lovely Arabian, he hastened to 
Paris, and delivered himself up to the vengeance of the law, hoping 
to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding. 

'' He did not succeed. They remained confined for five months 
before the trial took place ; the result of which deprived them of 
their fortune, and condemned them to perpetual exile from their 
native country. 
'They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, 
where I discovered them. Felix soon learned that the treacherous 
Turk, for whom he and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty 
and impotence, became a traitor to good feeling and honor, and had 
quitted Italy with his daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance 
of money to aid him, as he said, in some plan of future maintenance. 

'' Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix, and 
rendered him, when I first saw him, the most miserable of his family. He could have endured poverty, and, when this distress had 
been the meed of his virtue, he would have gloried in it; but the 
ingratitude of the Turk, and the loss of his beloved Safie, were 
misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. The arrival of the Arabian 
now infused new life into his soul. 

' When the news reached Leghorn, that Felix was deprived of 
his wealth and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to 
think no more of her lover, but prepare to return with him to her 
native country. The generous nature of Safie was outraged by this 
command; she attempted to expostulate with her father, but he left 
her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate. 
'A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter's apartment, 
and told her hastily, that he had reason to believe that his residence 
at Leghorn had been divulged, and that he should speedily be 
delivered up to the French government; he had, consequently, 
hired a vessel to convey him to Constantinople, for which city he 
should sail in a few hours. He intended to leave his daughter 
under the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure 
with the greater part of his property, which had not yet arrived at 
Leghorn. 
' When alone, Safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct that it would become her to pursue in this emergency. A 
residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and feelings were alike adverse to it. By some papers of her father's, which 



lOO FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

fell into her hands, she heard of the spot where he then resided. 
She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her, and a 
small sum of money, she quitted Italy, with an attendant, a native 
of Leghorn, but who understood the common language of Turkey, 
and departed for Germany. 

''She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the 
cottage of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. 
Safie nursed her with most devoted affection ; but the poor girl 
died, and the Arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country, and utterly ignorant of the customs of the 
world. She fell, however, into good hands. The Italian had 
mentioned the name of the spot for which they were bound ; and 
after her death, the woman of the house in which they had lived 
took care that Safie should arrive in safety at the cottage of her 
lover. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

'' OUCH was the history of my beloved cottagers. It impressed 
 me deeply. I learned, from the views of social life which it 
developed, to admire their virtues, and deprecate the vices of mankind. 

''As yet I looked upon crime as a distant evil; benevolence and 
generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire 
to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable 
qualities were called forth and displayed; but, in giving an account 
of the progress of my intellect, I must not omit a circumstance 
which occurred in the beginning of the month of August of the 
same year. 

" One night, during my accustomed visit to the neighboring 
wood, where I collected my own food, and brought home firing for 
my protectors, I found on the ground a leathern portmanteau, containing several articles of dress and some books. I eagerly seized 
the prize, and returned with it to the hovel. Fortunately the books 
were written in the language the elements of which I had acquired 
at the cottage ; they consisted of ' Paradise Lost,' a volume of 
'Plutarch's Lives,' and the 'Sorrows of Werter.' The possession 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. lOI 

of these pleasures gave me extreme delight; I now continually 
studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, while my 
friends were employed in their ordinary occupations. 
'I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. They 
produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the 
lowest dejection. In the ' Sorrows of Werter,' besides the interest 
of its simple and affecting story, so many opinions are canvassed, 
and so many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been to me 
obscure subjects, that I found in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. The gentle and domestic manners described, combined with lofty sentiments and feelings, which had 
for their object something out of self, accorded well with my experience among my protectors, and with the wants which were for 
ever alive in my own bosom. But I thought Werter himself a 
more divine being than I had ever beheld or imagined ; his char-f 
acter contained no pretension, but it sunk deep. The disquisitions 
upon death and suicide were calculated to fill me with wonder. I 
did not pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined 
towards the opinions of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without 
precisely understanding it. 

 As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own feelings and condition. I found myself similar to, yet at the same time 
strangely unlike, the beings concerning whom I read, and to whose 
conversation I was a listener. I sympathized with, and partly 
understood them, but I was uninformed in mind; I was dependent 
on none, and related to none. 'The path of my departure was 
free,' and there was none to lament my annihilation. My person 
was hideous, and my stature gigantic: what did this mean? Who 
was I? What was I. Whence did I come.' What was my destination. These questions continually recurred, but I was unable to 
solve them. 
'The volume of 'Plutarch's Lives' which I possessed, contained the histories of the first founders of the ancient republics. 
This book had a far different effect upon me from the ' Sorrows of 
Werter.' I learned from Werter's imaginations despondency and 
gloom: but Plutarch taught me high thoughts; he elevated me 
above the wretched sphere of my own reflections, to admire and 
love the heroes of past ages. Many things I read surpassed my 
understanding and experience. I had a very confused knowledge 
of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers, and boundless 
seas. But I was perfectly unacquainted with towns and large 



r02 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

assemblages of men. The cottage of my protectors had been the 
only school in which I had studied human nature; but this book 
developed new and mightier scenes of action. I read of men concerned in public affairs governing or massacring their species. 
I felt the greatest ardor for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence 
for vice, as far as I understood the signification of those terms, 
relative as they were, as I applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. 
Induced by these feelings, I was of course led to admire peaceable 
lawgivers, Numa, Solon, and Lycurgus, in preference to Romulus 
and Theseus. The patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these 
impressions to take a firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first 
introduction to humanity had been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have been imbued with different sensations. 

"But 'Paradise Lost' excited different and far deeper emotions. 
I read it, as I had read the other volumes which had fallen into my 
hands, as a true history. It moved every feeling of wonder and 
awe that the picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of exciting. I often remarked the several situations, as their similarity struck me to my own. Like Adam, I was 
created, apparently united by no link to any other being in existence ; but his state was far different from mine in every other 
respect. He had come forth from the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his 
Creator; he was allowed to converse with, and acquire knowledge 
from, beings of a superior nature : but I was wretched,. helpless, 
and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of 
my condition ; for often, like him, when I viewed the bliss of my 
protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. 

'' Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival in the hovel, I discovered some papers 
in the pocket of the dress which I had taken from your laboratory. 
At first I had neglected them ; but now that I was able to decipher 
the characters in which they were written, I began to study them 
with diligence. It was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. You minutely described in these papers every 
step you took in the progress of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic occurrences. You, doubtless, recollect these papers. Here they are. Every thing is related in them 
which bears reference to my accursed origin ; the whole detail of 
that series of disgusting circumstances which produced it is set in 
view; the minutest description of my odious and loathsome person 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. IO3 

is given, in language which painted your own horrors, and rendered mine ineffaceable. I sickened as I read. ' Hateful day when 
I received life! ' I exclaimed in agony. ' Cursed creator! Why did 
you form a monster so hideous that even you turned from me in 
disgust? God in pity made man beautiful and alluring, after his 
own image ; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid 
from its very resemblance. Satan had his companions, fellowdevils, to admire and encourage him ; but I am solitary and detested.' 

'' These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude ; but, when I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their 
amiable and benevolent dispositions, I persuaded myself, that, when 
they should become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues, 
they would compassionate me, and overlook my personal deformity. 
Could they turn from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion and friendship? I resolved, at least, not to 
despair, but in every way to fit myself for an interview with them 
which would decide my fate. I postponed this attempt for some 
months longer; for the importance attached to its success inspired 
me with a dread lest I should fail. Besides, I found that my understanding improved so much with every day's experience, that I was 
unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more months 
should have added to my wisdom. 

'' Several changes, in the mean time, took place in the cottage. 
The presence of Safie diff'used happiness among its inhabitants; 
and I also found that a greater degree of plenty reigned there. 
Felix and Agatha spent more time in amusement and conversation, 
and were assisted in their labors by servants. They did not appear 
rich, but were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and 
peaceful, while mine became every day more tumultuous. Increase 
of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a wretched 
outcast I was. I cherished hope, it is true; but it vanished, when I 
beheld my person reflected in water, or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail image and that inconstant shade. 
I endeavored to crush these fears, and to fortify myself for the 
trial which in a few months I resolved to undergo ; and sometimes 
I allowed my thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields 
of Paradise, and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathizing with my feelings and cheering my gloom ; their angelic 
countenances breathed smiles of consolation. But it was all a 
dream : no Eve soothed my sorrows, or shared my thoughts ; I was 
alone. I remembered Adam's supplication to his Creator; but 



I04 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

where was mine? he had abandoned me, and, in the bitterness of 
my heart, I cursed him. 

''Autumn passed thus. I saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves 
decay and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it had worn when I first beheld the woods and lovely 
moon. Yet I did not heed the bleakness of the weather; I was 
better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than 
heat. But my chief delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, 
and all the gay apparel of summer; when those deserted me, I 
turned with more attention towards the cottagers. Their happiness 
was not decreased by the absence of summer. They loved, and 
sympathized with, one another; and their joys, depending on each 
other, were not interrupted by the casualties that took place around 
them. The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to 
claim their protection and kindness; my heart yearned to be known 
and loved by these amiable creatures : to see their sweet looks 
turned towards me with affection was the utmost limit of my ambition. I dared not think that they would turn them from me with 
disdain and horror. The poor that stopped at their door were ne'er 
driven away. I asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a little 
food or rest: I required kindness and sympathy; but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it. 

''The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons 
had taken place since I awoke into life. My attention, at this time, 
was solely directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the 
cottage of my protectors. I revolved projects ; but that on which I 
finally fixed was, to enter the dwelling when the blind old man 
should be alone. I had sagacity enough to discover, that the unnatural hideousness of my person was the chief object of horror 
with those who had formerly beheld me. My voice, although 
harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I thought, therefore, that if, in 
the absence of his children, I could gain the good-will and mediation of the old De Lacey, I might, by his means, be tolerated by 
my younger protectors. 

" One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the 
ground, and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, Safie, 
Agatha, and Felix departed on a long country walk, and the old 
man, at his own desire, was left alone in the cottage. When his 
children had departed, he took up his guitar, and played several 
mournful but sweet airs, more sweet and mournful than I had ever 
heard him play before. At first his countenance was illuminated 
with pleasure, but, as he continued, thoughtfulness and sadness 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. IO5 

succeeded ; at length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed 
in reflection.  

''My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, 
which would decide my hopes, or realize my fears. The servants 
were gone to a neighboring fair. All was silent in and around the 
cottage : it was an excellent opportunity; yet, when I proceeded to 
execute my plan, my limbs failed me, and I sunk to the ground. 
Again I rose ; and, exerting all the firmness of which I was master, 
removed the planks which I had placed before my hovel to conceal 
my retreat. The fresh air revived me, and, with renewed determination, I approached the door of their cottage. 

' I knocked. ' Who is there ? ' said the old man,  ' Come in.' 
'I entered; 'Pardon this intrusion,' said I, 'I am a traveller in 
want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me, if you would allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.' 

" ' Enter,' said De Lacey ; ' and I will try in what manner I can 
relieve your wants ; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, 
and, as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food 
for you.' 

"'Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food: it is 
warmth and rest only that I need.' 

"I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that every minute 
was precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to 
commence the interview; when the old man addressed me :  

" ' By your language, stranger, I suppose you are my countryman ; 
are you French ? ' 

"'No; but I was educated by a French family, and understand 
that language only. I am now going to claim the protection of 
some friends, whom I sincerely love, and of whose favor I have 
some hopes.' 

" ' Are these Germans ? ' 

" 'No, they are French. But let us change the subject. I am an 
unfortunate and deserted creature ; I look around, and have no relation or friend upon earth. These amiable people to whom I go 
have never seen me, and know little of me. I am full of fears ; for, 
if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world for ever.' 

" ' Do not despair. To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate ; 
but the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious selfinterest, are full of brotherly love and charity. Rely, therefore, 
on your hopes ; and, if these friends are good and amiable, do not 
despair.' 

"'They are kind  they are the most excellent creatures in the 



Io6 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

world ; but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. I have 
good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless, and, in 
some degree, beneficial ; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, 
and where they ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold 
only a detestable monster.' 

'''That is indeed unfortunate; but, if you are really blameless, 
cannot you undeceive them.'' 

"'I am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account 
that I feel so many overwhelming terrors. I tenderly love these 
friends ; I have, unknown to them, been for many months in the 
habits of daily kindness towards them ; but they believe that I 
wish to injure them, and it is that prejudice which I wish to overcome.' 

" ' Where do these friends reside.'' 

'' ' Near this spot.' 

"The old man paused, and then continued, 'If you will unreservedly confide to me the particulars of your tale, I may perhaps 
be of use in undeceiving them. I am blind, and cannot judge of 
your countenance, but there is something in your words which 
persuades me that you are sincere. I am poor, and an exile; but it 
will afford me true pleasure to be in any way serviceable to a human 
creature.' 

"' Excellent man ! I thank you, and accept your generous offer. 
You raise me from the dust by this kindness ; and I trust, that, by 
your aid, I shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of 
your fellow-creatures.' 

" ' Heaven forbid ! even if you were really criminal ; for that can 
only drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. I 
also am unfortunate ; I and my family have been condemned, 
although innocent : judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes." 

"'How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor? From 
your lips first have I heard the voice of kindness directed towards 
me ; I shall be for ever grateful ; and your present humanity assures me of success with those friends whom I am on the point of 
meeting.' 

" 'May I know the names and residence of those friends?' 

" I paused. This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which 
was to rob me of, or bestow, happiness on me for ever. I struggled 
vainly for firmness sufl[icient to answer him, but the efi'ort destroyed 
all my remaining strength ; I sank on the chair, and sobbed aloud. 
At that moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors. I had 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. IO7 

not a moment to lose ; but, seizing the hand of the old man, I cried, Now is the time! save and protect me! You and jour family are 
the friends whom I seek. Do not you desert me in the hour of 
trial ! ' 

" ' Great God ! ' exclaimed the old man, ' who are you ? ' ' At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, 
and Agatha entered. Who can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me? Agatha fainted; and Safie, unable to 
attend to her friend, rushed out of the cottage. Felix darted forward, and with supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose 
knees I clung. In a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground, 
and struck me violently with a stick. I could have torn him limb 
from limb, as the lion rends the antelope. But my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and I refrained. I saw him on the 
point of repeating his blow, when, overcome by pain and anguish, 
I quitted the cottage, and in the general tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel. 



CHAPTER XV. 

'URSED, cursed creator! Why did I live.? Why, in that 
- instant, did I not extinguish the spark of existence which 
you had so wantonly bestowed? I know not; despair had not yet 
taken possession of me ; my feelings were those of rage and revenge. 
I could with pleasure have destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants, 
and have glutted myself with their shrieks and misery. 

"When night came, I quitted my retreat, and wandered in the 
wood ; and now, no longer restrained by the fear of discovery, I 
gave vent to my anguish in fearful bowlings. I was like a wild 
beast that had broken the toils ; destroying the objects that obstructed me, and ranging through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh ! what a miserable night I passed ! the cold stars shone 
in mockery, and the bare trees waved their branches above me : 
now and then the sweet voice of a bird burst forth amidst the 
universal stillness. All, save I, were at rest or in enjoyment: I, 
like the archfiend, bore a hell within me ; and, finding myself unsympathized with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc and 
destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed the 
ruin. 



I08 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

But this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; I 
became fatigued with excess of bodily exertion, and sank on the 
damp grass in the sick impotence of despair. There was none 
among the myriads of men that existed who would pity or assist 
me; and should I feel kindness towards my enemies? No: from 
that moment I declared everlasting war against the species, and, 
more than all, against him who had formed me and sent me forth 
to this insupportable misery. 

'The sun rose; I heard the voices of men, and knew that it was 
impossible to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly 
I hid myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the 
ensuing hours to reflection on my situation. 

''The pleasant sunshine, and the pure air of day, restored me to 
some degree of tranquillity; and, when I considered what had 
passed at the cottage, I could not help believing that I had been 
too hasty in my conclusions. I had certainly acted imprudently. 
It was apparent that my conversation had interested the father in 
my behalf, and I was a fool in having exposed my person to the 
horror of his children. I ought to have familiarized the old De 
Lacey to me, and by degrees have discovered mjself to the rest of 
his family, when they should have been prepared for my approach. 
But I did not believe my errors to be irretrievable ; and, after 
much consideration, I resolved to return to the cottage, seek the 
old man, and by my representations win him to my party. 

''These thoughts calmed me, nd in the afternoon I sank into a 
profound sleep ; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be 
visited by peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the preceding 
day was for ever acting before my eyes ; the females were flying, 
and the enraged Felix tearing me from his father's feet. I awoke 
exhausted ; and, finding that it was already night, crept forth from 
my hiding-place, and went in search of food. 

"When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps toward 
the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was 
at peace. I crept into my hovel, and remained in silent expectation 
of the accustomed hour when the family arose. That hour past, 
the sun mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not 
appear. I trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the cottage was dark, and I heard no motion ; I cannot describe the agony of this suspense. 

"Presently two countrymen passed by; but, pausing near the 
cottage, they entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. IO9 

language of the country, which differed from that of my protectors. 
Soon after, however, Felix approached with another man: I was 
surprised, as I knew that he had not quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover, from his discourse, the 
meaning of these unusual appearances. 

'"Do you consider,' said his companion to him, 'that you will 
be obliged to pay three months' rent, and to lose the produce of 
your garden? I do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and I 
beg therefore, that you will take some days to consider of your 
determination.' 

'' ' It is utterly useless,' replied Felix, ' we can never again inhabit 
your cottage. The life of my father is in the greatest danger, owing 
to the dreadful circumstance that I have related. My wife and sister will never recover their horror. I entreat you not to reason 
with me any more. Take possession of your tenement, and let me 
fly from this place.' 

" Felix trembled violently as he said this. He and his companion 
entered the cottage, in which they remained for a few minutes, and 
then departed. I never saw any of the family of De Lacey more. 

''I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state 
of utter and stupid despair. My protectors had departed, and had 
broken the only link that held me to the world. For the first time 
the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not 
strive to control them ; but, allowing myself to be borne away by 
the stream, I bent my mind towards injury and death. When I 
thought of my friends, of the mild voice of De Lacey, the gentle 
eyes of Agatha, and the exquisite beauty of the Arabian, these 
thoughts vanished, and a gush of tears somewhat soothed me. But, 
again, when I reflected that they had spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger; and, unable to injure any thing 
human, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As night 
advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage ; 
and, after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, I waited with forced impatience, until the moon had sunk, to 
commence my operations. 

''As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods, and 
quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens ; the 
blast tore along like a mighty avalanche, and produced a kind of 
insanity in my spirits, that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. I lighted the dry branch of a tree, and danced with fury 
around the devoted cottage, my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of wiiich the moon nearly touched. A part of its orb 



no Frankenstein; or, 

was at length hid, and I waved mj brand; it sunk, and with a loud 
scream I fired the straw and heath and bushes which I had collected. The wind fanned the fire, and the cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it, and licked it with their 
forked and destroying tongues. 

"'As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any 
part of the habitation, I quitted the scene, and sought for refuge in 
the woods. 

''And now, with the world before me, whither should I bend my 
steps? I resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but 
to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. 
At length the thought of you crossed my mind. I learned from 
your papers that you were my father, my creator; and to whom 
could I apply with more fitness than to him who had given me life? 
Among the lessons that Felix had bestowed upon Safie, geography 
had not been omitted ; I had learned from these the relative situations of the difterent countries of the earth. You had mentioned 
Geneva as the name of your native town ; and towards this place I 
resolved to proceed. 

" But how was I to direct myself ? I knew that I must travel in a 
south-westerly direction to reach my destination ; but the sun was 
my only guide. I did not know the names of the towns that I was 
to pass through, nor could I ask information from a single human 
being; but I did not despair. From you only could I hope for succor, although towards you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. 
Unfeeling, heartless creator ! you had endowed me with perceptions 
and passions, and then cast me abroad, an object for the scorn and 
horror of mankind. But on you only had I a claim for pi and 
redress, and from you I determined to seek that justice which I 
vainly attempted to gain from any other being that wore the human 
form. 

"Mj'- travels were long, and the sufferings I endured intense. It 
was late in autumn when I quitted the district where I had so long 
resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a human being. Nature decayed around me, and the sun 
became heatless ; rain and snow poured around me ; mighty rivers 
were frozen ; the surface of the earth was hard and chill and bare, 
and I found no shelter. Oh, earth! how often did I imprecate curses on the cause of my being! The mildness of my nature had 
fled, and all within me was turned to gall and bitterness. The 
nearer I approached to your habitation, the more deeply did I feel 
the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. Snow fell, and the 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. Ill 

waters were hardened, but I rested not. A few incidents now and 
then directed me, and I possessed a map of the country; but I often 
wandered wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed 
me no respite ; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could not extract their food ; but a circumstance that happened 
when I arrived on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun had 
recovered its warmth, and the earth again began to look green, 
confirmed in an especial manner the bitterness and horror of my 
feelings. 

" I generally rested during the day, and travelled only when I was 
secured by night from the view of man. One morning, however, 
finding that my path lay through a deep wood, I ventured to continue my journey after the sun had risen ; the day, which was one 
of the first of spring, cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of the air. I felt emotions of gentleness 
and pleasure that had long appeared dead, revive within me. Half 
surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be 
borne away by them ; and, forgetting my solitude and deformity, 
dared to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I 
even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the blessed 
sun, which bestowed such joy upon me. 

'' I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I came 
to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into 
which many of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the 
fresh spring. Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to 
pursue, when I heard the sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade of a cypress. I was scarcely hid, when 
a young girl came running towards the spot where I was concealed, 
laughing as if she ran from some one in sport. She continued her 
course along the precipitous sides of the river, when suddenly her 
foot slipped, and she fell into the rapid stream. I rushed from my 
hiding-place, and, with extreme labor from the force of the current, 
saved her, and dragged her to shore. She was senseless ; and I 
endeavored, by every means in my power, to restore animation, 
when I was suddenly interrupted by the approach of a rustic, who 
was probably the person from whom she had playfully fled. On 
seeing me, he darted towards me, and, tearing the girl from my 
arms, hastened towards the deeper parts of the wood. I followed 
speedily, I hardly knew why ; but, when the man saw me draw near, 
he aimed a gun, which he carried, at my body, and fired. I sunk to 
the ground, and my injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into 
the wood. 



112 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 
'This was, then, the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a 
human being from destruction, and, as a recompense, I now writhed 
under the pain of a wound, which shattered the flesh and bone. 
The feelings of kindness and gentleness, which I had entertained 
but a few moments before, gave place to hellish rage and gnashing 
of teeth. Inflamed by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance 
to all mankind. But the agony of my wound overcame me : my 
pulses paused, and I fainted. 

" For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavoring 
to cure the wound which I had received. The ball had entered my 
shoulder, and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed 
through ; at any rate, I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented also by the oppressive sense of the injustice 
and ingratitude of their infliction. My daily vows rose for revenge, 
such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish I had 
endured. 

''After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my journey. The labors I endured were no longer to be alleviated by the 
bright sun or gentle breezes of spring : all joy was but a mockery, 
which insulted my desolate state, and made me feel more painfully 
that I was not made for the enjoyment of pleasure. 

'' But my toils now drew near a close ; and, two months from this 
time, I reached the environs of Geneva. 

''It was evening when I arrived, and I retired to a hiding-place 
among the fields that surround it, to meditate in what manner I 
should apply to you. I was oppressed by fatigue and hunger, and 
far too unhappy to enjoy the gentle breezes of evening, or the prospect of the sun setting behind the stupendous mountains of Jura. 

"At this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection, which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, 
who came running into the recess I had chosen with all the 
sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea 
seized me, that this little creature was unprejudiced, and had lived 
too short a time to have imbibed a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I could seize him, and educate him as my companion and 
friend, I should not be so desolate in this peopled earth. 

"Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed, and 
drew him towards me. As soon as he beheld my form, he placed 
his hands before his eyes and uttered a shrill scream: I drew his 
hand forcibly from his face, and said, ' Child, what is the meaning 
of this. I do not intend to hurt you; listen to me.' 

" He struggled violently. ' Let me go,' he cried; ' monster! ugly 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. II3 

wretch ! you wish to eat me, and tear me to pieces ; you are an 
ogre ; let me go, or I will tell my papa.' 

"'Boy, you will never see your father again; you must come 
with me.' 

" ' Hideous monster ! let me go ; my papa is a Syndic ;  he is M. 
Frankenstein ; he would punish you. You dare not keep me.' 

" ' Frankenstein ! you belong then to my enemy,  to him towards 
whom I have sworn eternal revenge ; you shall be my first victim.' 

''The child still struggled, and loaded me with epithets which 
carried despair to my heart : I grasped his throat to silence him, 
and in a moment he lay dead at my feet. 

"I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation 
and hellish triumph : clapping my hands, I exclaimed, ' I, too, can 
create desolation: my enemy is not impregnable; this death will 
carry despair to him, and a thousand other miseries shall torment 
and destroy him.' 

"As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on 
his breast. I took it; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. 
In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a few 
moments I gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep 
lashes, and her lovely lips ; but presently my rage returned : I remembered that I was for ever deprived of the delights that such 
beautiful creatures could bestow; and that she whose resemblance 
I contemplated would, in regarding me, have changed that air of 
divine benignity to one expressive of disgust and aff'right. 

" Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage. 
I only wonder, that, at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in exclamations and agony, I did not rush among mankind, 
and perish in the attempt to destroy them. 

"While I was overcome by these feelings, I left the spot where I 
had committed the murder, and was seeking a more secluded hidingplace, when I perceived a young woman passing near me. She 
was young; not, indeed, so beautiful as her whose portrait I held, 
but of an agreeable aspect, and blooming in the loveliness of youth 
and health. Here, I thought, is one of those whose smiles are 
bestowed on all but me; she shall not escape : thanks to the lessons 
of Felix, and the sanguinary laws of man, I have learned how to 
work mischief. I approached her unperceived, and placed the portrait securely in one of the folds of her dress. 

" For some days I haunted the spot where these things had taken 
place ; sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the 
world and its miseries for ever. At length I wandered toward these 

8 



1 14 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which jou alone can gratify. We 
may not part until you have promised to comply with my requisition. I am alone, and miserable: man will not associate with me; 
but one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself to 
me. My companion must be of the same species, and have the 
same defects. This being you must create." 



CHAPTER XVI. 

nrHE being finished speaking, and fixed his looks upon me in 
- expectation of a reply. But I was bewildered, perplexed, and 
unable to arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent 
of his proposition. He continued  

' You must create a female for me, with whom I can live in the 
interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. This 
you alone can do ; and I demand it as a right which you must not 
refuse." 

The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that 
had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and, as he said this, I could no longer suppress the rage that 
burned within me. 
'I do refuse it," I replied; ' and no torture shall ever extort a 
consent from me. You may render me the most miserable of men, 
but you shall never make me base in my own eyes. Shall I create 
another like yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the 
world . Begone! I have answered jou ; you may torture me, but I 
will never consent." 

'You are in the wrong," replied the fiend; ' and, instead of 
threatening, I content to reason with you. I am malicious because 
I am miserable; am I not shunned and hated by all mankind.? 
You, my creator, would tear me to pieces, and triumph ; remember that, and tell me why I should pity man more than man pities 
me? You would not, certainly, call it murder, if you could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts, and destroy my frame, the 
work of your own hands. Shall I respect the man, when he contemns me? Let him live with me in the interchange of kindness, 
and, instead of injury, I would bestow every benefit upon him, with 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. II5 

tears of gratitude at his acceptance. But that cannot be; the 
human senses are insurmountable barriers to our union. Yet 
mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery. I will revenge 
my injuries: if I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear; and chiefly 
towards you, my arch-enemy, because my creator, do I swear inextinguishable hatred. Have a care : I will work at your destruction, nor finish until I desolate your heart, so that you curse the 
hour of your birth." 

A fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was 
wrinkled into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; 
but presently he calmed himself, and proceeded :  

"I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me; for 
you do not reflect that you are the cause of its excess. If any 
being felt emotions of benevolence towards me, I should return 
them an hundred and an hundred fold : for that one creature's 
sake, I would make peace with the whole kind ! But I now indulge 
in dreams of bliss that cannot be realized. What I ask of you is 
reasonable and moderate ; I demand a creature of another sex, but 
as hideous as myself: the gratification is small, but it is all that I 
can receive, and it shall content me. It is true, we shall be 
monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall 
be more attached to one another. Our lives will not be happy, but 
they will be harmless, and free from the misery I now feel. O 
my creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for 
one benefit ! Let me see that I excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my request." 

I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of the possible consequences of my consent; but I felt that there was some justice in 
his argument. His tale, and the feelings he now expressed, proved 
him to be a creature of fine sensations ; and did I not, as his maker, 
owe him all the portion of happiness that it was in my power to 
bestow. He saw my change of feeling, and continued :  

' If you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall 
ever see us again : I will go to the vast wilds of South America. 
My food is not that of man ; I do not destroy the lamb and the kid, 
to glut my appetite ; acorns and berries aff'ord me suflScient nourishment. My companion will be of the same nature as myself, and 
will be content with the same fare. We shall make our bed of dried 
leaves ; the sun will shine on us as on man, and will ripen our food. 
The picture I present to you is peaceful and human, and you must 
feel that you could deny it only in the wantonness of power and 
cruelty. Pitiless as you have been towards me, I now see compas


Il6 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

sion in your eyes ; let me seize the favorable moment, and persuade 
you to promise what I so ardently desire." 

''You propose," replied I, ''to fly from the habitations of man, 
to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your 
only companions. How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man, persevere in this exile? You will return, and again 
seek their kindness, and you will meet with their detestation ; your 
evil passions will be renewed, and you will then have a companion 
to aid you in the task of destruction. This may not be ; cease to 
argue the point, for I cannot consent." 

" How inconstant are your feelings ! But a moment ago you were 
moved by my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints? I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, and by you that made me, that, with the companion you 
bestow, I will quit the neighborhood of man, and dwell, as it may 
chance, in the most savage of places. My evil passions will have 
fled, for I shall meet with sympathy; my life will flow quietly away, 
and, in my dying moments, I shall not curse my maker." 

His words had a strange effect upon me. I compassionated him, 
and sometimes felt a wish to console him ; but, when I looked upon 
him, when I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart 
sickened, and my feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. I tried to stifle these sensations ; I thought, that, as I could 
not sympathize with him, I had no right to withhold from him 
the small portion of happiness which was yet in my power to 
bestow. 

" You swear," I said, " to be harmless ; but have you not already 
shown a degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust 
you? May not even this be a feint that will increase your triumph 
by aftording a wider scope for your revenge?" 

" How is this? I thought I had moved your compassion, and yet 
you still refuse to bestow on me the only beneflt that can soften my 
heart, and render me harmless. If I have no ties and no affections, 
hatred and vice must be my portion : the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and I shall become a thing of whose 
existence every one will be ignorant. My vices are the children of 
a forced solitude that I abhor; and my virtues will necessarily arise 
when I live in communion with an equal. I shall feel the affections 
of a sensitive being, and become linked to the chain of existence 
and events, from which I am now excluded." 

I paused some time to reflect on all he had related, and the various arguments which he had employed. I thought of the promise 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. II7 

of virtues which he had displayed on the opening of his existence, 
and the subsequent blight of all kindly feeling by the loathing and 
scorn which his protectors had manifested towards him. His power 
and threats were not omitted in my calculations : a creature who 
could exist in the ice-caves of the glaciers, and hide himself from 
pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices, was a being 
possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with. After a long 
pause of reflection, I concluded that the justice due both to him and 
my fellow-creatures demanded of me that I should comply with his 
request. Turning to him, therefore, I said :  

' I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit Europe 
for ever, and every other place in the neighborhood of man, as soon 
as I shall deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you 
in your exile." 

'' I swear," he cried, '' by the sun, and by the blue sky of heaven, 
that if you grant my prayer, while they exist you shall never behold 
me again. Depart to your home, and commence your labors : I 
shall watch their progress with unutterable anxiety; and fear not 
but that when you are ready I shall appear." 

Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any 
change in my sentiments. I saw him descend the mountain with 
greater speed than the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost him 
among the undulations of the sea of ice. 

His tale had occupied the whole day; and the sun was upon the 
verge of the horizon when he departed. I knew that I ought to 
hasten my descent towards the valley, as I should soon be encompassed in darkness ; but my heart was heavy and my steps slow. 
The labor of winding among the little paths of the mountains, and 
fixing my feet firmly as I advanced, perplexed me, occupied as I was 
by the emotions which the occurrences of the day had produced. 
Night was far advanced, when I came to the half-way resting-place, 
and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars shone at intervals, as the clouds passed from over them ; the dark pines rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the ground : 
it was a scene of wonderful solemnity, and stirred strange thoughts 
within me. I wept bitterly; and, clasping my hands in agony, I 
exclaimed, " O stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to 
mock me: if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let 
me become as nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in 
darkness." 

These were wild and miserable thoughts ; but I cannot describe 
to you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me, and 



Il8 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

how I listened to every blast of wind, as if it were a dull, ugly sirocco 
on its way to consume me. 

Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamonix; 
but my presence, so haggard and strange, hardly calmed the fears 
of my family, who had waited the whole night in anxious expectation of my return. 

The following day we returned to Geneva. The intention of my 
father in coming had been to divert my mind, and to restore my lost 
tranquillity; but the medicine had been fatal. And, unable to account for the excess of misery I appeared to suffer, he hastened to 
return home, hoping the quiet and monotony of a domestic life 
would by degrees alleviate my sufferings, from whatever cause they 
might spring. 

For myself, I was passive in all their arrangements ; and the gentle affection of my beloved Elizabeth was inadequate to draw me 
from the depth of my despair. The promise I had made to the 
demon weighed upon my mind, like Dante's iron cowl on the heads 
of the hellish hjpocrites. All my pleasures of earth and sky passed 
before me like a dream, and that thought only had to me the reality 
of life. Can you wonder that sometimes a kind of insanity possessed me, or that I saw continually about me a multitude of filthy 
animals, inflicting on me incessant torture, that often extorted 
screams and bitter groans? 

By degrees, however, these feelings became calmed. I entered 
again into the every-day scene of life, if not with interest, at least 
with some degree of tranquillity. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

DAY after day, week after week, passed away on my return to 
Geneva ; and I could not collect the courage to recommence my 
work. I feared the vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet I was 
unable to overcome my repugnance to the task which was enjoined 
me. I found that I could not compose a female without again 
devoting several months to profound study and laborious disquisition. I had heard of some discoveries having been made by an 
English philosopher, the knowledge of which was material to my 
success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father's consent 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. II9 

to visit England for this purpose ; but I clung to every pretence of 
delay, and could not resolve to interrupt my returning tranquillity. 
My health, which had hitherto declined, was now much restored; 
and my spirits, when unchecked by the memory of my unhappy 
promise, rose proportionably. My father saw this change .with 
pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards the best method of 
eradicating the remains of my melancho  which every now and 
then would return hy fits, and with a devouring blackness overcast 
the approaching sunshine. At these moments I took refuge in the 
most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the lake alone in a 
little boat, watching the clouds, and listening to the rippling of the 
waves, silent and listless. But the fresh air and bright sun seldom 
failed to restore me to some degree of composure ; and, on my 
return, I met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile and 
a more cheerful heart. 

It was after my return from one of these rambles that my father, 
calling me aside, thus addressed me :  

'I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed 
your former pleasures, and seem to be returning to yourself. And yet 
you are still unhappy, and still avoid our society. For some time 
I was lost in conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an 
idea struck me; and, if it is well founded, I conjure you to avow it. 
Reserve on such a point would be not only useless, but draw down 
treble misery on us all." 

I trembled violently at this exordium, and my father continued,  
I confess, my son, that I have always looked forward to your 
marriage with your cousin as the tie of our domestic comfort, and 
the stay of my declining years. You were attached to each other 
from your earliest infancy ; you studied together, and appeared, in 
dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another. But so 
blind is the experience of man, that what I conceived to be the best 
assistants to my plan may have entirely destroyed it. You, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any wish that she might 
become your wife. Nay, you may have met with another whom 
you may love ; and, considering yourself as bound in honor to your 
cousin, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you 
appear to feel." 

"My dear father, re-assure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly 
and sincerely. I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth 
does, my warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes 
and prospects are entirely bound up in the expectation of our 
union." 



I20 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 
'The expression of your sentiments on this subject, my dear 
Victor, gives me more pleasure than I have for some time experienced. If you feel this, we shall assuredly be happy, hovever 
present events may cast a gloom over us. But it is this gloom, 
which appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind, that I 
wish to dissipate. Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an 
immediate solemnization of the marriage. We have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us from that every-day tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. You are younger; yet I 
do not suppose, possessed, as you are, of a competent fortune, that 
an early marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of 
honor and utility that you may have formed. Do not suppose, 
however, that I wish to dictate happiness to you, or that a delay on 
your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my 
words with candor, and answer me, I conjure you, with confidence 
and sincerity." 

I listened to my father in silence, and remained for some time 
incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind a 
multitude of thoughts, and endeavored to arrive at some conclusion. 
Alas ! to me the idea of an immediate union with my cousin was 
one of horror and dismay. I was bound by a solemn promise, 
which I had not yet fulfilled, and dared not break; or, if I did, 
what manifold miseries might not impend over me and my devoted 
family ! Could I enter into a festival with this deadly weight yet 
hanging round my neck, and bowing me to the ground ? I must 
perform my engagement, and let the monster depart with his mate, 
before I allowed myself to enjoy the delight of a union from which 
I expected peace. 

I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either 
journeying to England, or entering into a long correspondence 
with those philosophers of that country, whose knowledge and 
discoveries were of indispensable use to me in my present undertaking. The latter method of obtaining the desired intelligence 
was dilatory and unsatisfactory : besides, any variation was agreeable to me, and I was delighted with the idea of spending a year or 
two in change of scene and variety of occupation, in absence from 
my family; during which period some event might happen which 
would restore me to them in peace and happiness : my promise 
might be fulfilled, and the monster have departed; or some accident might occur to destroy him, and put an end to my slavery for 
ever. 

These feelings dictated my answer to my father. I expressed a 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 121 

wish to visit England ; but, concealing the true reasons of this 
request, I clothed my desires under the guise of wishing to travel 
and see the world before I sat down for life within the walls of my 
native town. 

I urged my entreaty with earnestness, and my father was easily 
induced to comply; for a more indulgent and less dictatorial parent 
did not exist upon earth. Our plan was soon arranged. I should 
travel to Strasburg, where Clerval would join me. Some short 
time would be spent in the towns of Holland, and our principal 
stay would be in England. We should return by France ; and it 
was agreed that the tour should occupy the space of two years. 

My father pleased himself with the reflection, that my union with 
Elizabeth should take place immediately on my return to Geneva. 
''These two years," said he, ''will pass swiftly, and it will be the 
last delay that will oppose itself to your happiness. And, indeed, 
I earnestly desire that period to arrive, when we shall all be united, 
and neither hopes nor fears arise to disturb our domestic calm." 
'I am content," I replied, "with your arrangement. By that 
time we shall both have become wiser, and I hope happier, than we 
at present are." I sighed ; but my father kindly forbore to question 
me further concerning the cause of my dejection. He hoped that 
new scenes, and the amusement of travelling, would restore my 
tranquillity. 

I now made arrangements for my journey; but one feeling 
haunted me, which filled me with fear and agitation. During my 
absence I should leave my friends unconscious of the existence of 
their enemy, and unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he 
might be by my departure. But he had promised to follow me 
wherever I might go; and would he not accompany me to England. This imagination was dreadful in itself, but soothing, inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends. I was agonized with 
the idea of the possibility that the reverse of this might happen. 
But through the whole period during which I was the slave of my 
creature, I allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of the 
moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the 
fiend would follow me, and exempt my family from the danger of 
his machinations. 

It was in the latter end of August that I departed, to pass two 
years of exile. Elizabeth approved of the reasons of my departure, 
and only regretted that she had not the same opportunities of enlarging her experience, and cultivating her understanding. She 
wept, however, as she bade me farewell, and entreated me to return 



123 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

happy and tranquil.' We all," said she, ''depend upon you; and 
if you are miserable, what must be our feelings?" 

I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, 
hardly knowing whither I was going, and careless of what was 
passing around. I remembered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that I reflected on it, to order that my chemical instruments 
should be packed to go with me ; for I resolved to fulfil my promise 
while abroad, and return, if possible, a free man. Filled with 
dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful and majestic 
scenes ; but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. I could only 
think of the bourn of my travels, and the work which was to occupy me while they endured. 

After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I traversed many leagues, I arrived at Strasburg, where I waited two 
days for Clerval. He came. Alas, how great was the contrast between us ! He was alive to every new scene ; joyful when he saw 
the beauties of the setting sun, and more happy when he beheld it 
rise, and recommence a new day. He pointed out to me the shifting colors of the landscape, and the appearances of the sky. " This 
is what it is to live," he cried; " now I enjoy existence! But you, 
my dear Frankenstein, wherefore are you desponding and sorrowful." In truth, I was occupied by gloomy thoughts, and neither 
saw the descent of the evening star, nor the golden sunrise reflected 
in the Rhine. And you, my friend, would be far more amused with 
the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery with an eye of 
feeling and delight, than to listen to my reflections. I, a miserable 
wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment. 

We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasburg 
to Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London. During this voyage, we passed  many willowy islands, and saw several beautiful towns. We staid a day at Manheim, and, on the fifth 
from our departure from Strasburg, arrived at Mayence. The 
course of the Rhine below the Mayence becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly, and winds between hills, not 
high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. We saw many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by black woods, 
high and inaccessible. This part of the Rhine, indeed, presents a 
singularly variegated landscape. In one spot you view rugged hills, 
ruined castles, overlooking tremendous precipices, with the dark 
Rhine rushing beneath; and, on the sudden turn of a promontory, 
flourishing vineyards, with green sloping banks, and a meandering 
river, and populous towns, occupy the scene. 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 1 23 

We travelled at the time of the vintage, and heard the song of the 
laborers, as we glided down the stream. Even I, depressed in mind, 
and my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I w2ls 
pleased. I lay at the bottom of the boat, and, as I gazed on the 
cloudless blue sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I 
had long been a stranger. And if these were my sensations, who 
can describe those of Henry.? He felt as if he had been transported 
to Fairy-land, and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by man. ''I 
have seen," he said, " the most beautiful scenes of my own country; 
I have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black and 
impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and mournful 
appearance, were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the 
eye by their gay appearance ; I have seen this lake agitated by a 
tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water, and gave you 
an idea of what the water-spout must be on the great ocean, and 
the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain, where the priest 
and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche, and where 
their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the 
nightly wind; I have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the 
Pays de Vaud : but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all 
those wonders. The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic 
and strange ; but there is a charm in the banks of this divine river, 
that I never before saw equalled. Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice ; and also that on the island, almost concealed 
among the foliage of those lovely trees ; and now that group of 
laborers, coming from among their vines ; and that village, half-hid 
in the recess of the mountain. Oh, surely, the spirit that inhabits 
and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man, than 
those who pile the glacier, or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the 
mountains of our own country." 

Clerval ! beloved friend ! even now it delights me to record your 
words, and to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently 
deserving. He was a being formed in the " very poetry of nature." 
His wild and enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart. His soul overflowed with ardent affections, and 
his friendship was of that devoted and wondrous nature that the 
worldly minded teach us to look for only in the imagination. But 
even human sympathies were not sufficient to satisfy his eager 
mind. The scenery of external nature, which others regard only 
with admiration, he loved with ardor :  


 Leigh Hunt's "Rimini" 



124 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

" The sounding cataract 
Haunted him like a passion ; the tall rock, 
The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood. 
Their colors and their forms, were then to him 
An appetite ; a feeling, and a love. 
That had no need of a remoter charm, 
By thought supplied, or any interest 
Unborrowed from the eye. 

And where does he now exist? Is this gentle and lovely being 
lost for ever? Has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations, 
fanciful and magnificent, which formed a world whose existence 
depended on the life of its creator; has this mind perished? Does 
it now only exist in my memory? No, it is not thus ; your form, so 
divinely wrought, and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your 
spirit still visits and consoles your unhappy friend. 

Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a 
slight tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe 
my heart, overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance 
creates. I will proceed with my tale. 

Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland ; and we 
resolved to post the remainder of our way; for the wind was contrary, and the stream of the river was too gentle to aid us. 

Our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery; 
but we arrived in a few days at Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by 
sea to England. It was on a clear morning, in the latter days of 
December, that I first saw the white cliffs of Britain. The banks 
of the Thames presented a new scene ; they were flat, but fertile, 
and almost every town was marked by the remembrance of some 
story. We saw Tilbury Fort, and remembered the Spanish armada ; 
Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich, places which I had heard of 
even in my country. 

At length we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul's 
towering above all, and the Tower famed in English history. 
 Vordsworth's "Tintern Abbey." 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I25 



CHAPTER XVIIL 

T ONDON was our present point of rest; we determined to re- ' main several months in this wonderful and celebrated city 
Clerval desired the intercourse of the men of genius and talent who 
flourished at this time ; but this was with me a secondary object : 
I was principally occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary for the completion of my promise, and quickly 
availed myself of the letters of introduction that I had brought with 
me, addressed to the most distinguished natural philosophers. 

If this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness, it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure. But a 
blight had come over my existence, and I only visited these people 
for the sake of the information they might give me on the subject 
in which my interest was so terribly profound. Company was irksome to me ; when alone, I could fill my mind with the sights of 
heaven and earth ; the voice of Henry soothed me, and I could thus 
cheat myself into a transitory peace. But busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to my heart. I saw an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my fellow-men ; this barrier was 
sealed with the blood of William and Justine ; and to reflect on the 
events connected with those names, filled my soul with anguish. 

But in Clerval I saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive, and anxious to gain experience and instruction. The difference of manners which he observed was to him an inexhaustible 
source of instruction and amusement. He was for ever busy; and 
the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected 
mien. I tried to conceal this as much as possible, that I might 
not debar him from the pleasures natural to one who was entering 
on a new scene of life, undisturbed by any care or bitter reflection. 
I often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, 
that I might remain alone. I now also began to collect the 
materials necessary for my new creation, and this was to me like 
the torture of single drops of water continually falling on the head. 
Every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme anguish, and 
every word that I spoke in allusion to it, caused my lips to quiver, 
and my heart to palpitate. 

After passing some months in London, we req ived a letter from 
a person in Scotland, who had formerly been our visitor at Geneva. 
He mentioned the beauties of his native country, and asked us if 



126 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

those were not sufficient allurements to induce us to prolong our 
journey as far north as Perth, where he resided. Clerval eagerly 
desired to accept this invitation ; and I, although I abhorred society, 
wished to view again the mountains and streams, and all the 
wondrous works with which Nature adorns her chosen dwellingplaces. 

We had arrived in England at the beginning of January, and it 
was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our 
journey towards the north at the expiration of another month. In 
this expedition we did not intend to follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland 
lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of this tour about the 
end of July. I packed my chemical instruments, and the materials 
I had collected, resolving to finish my labors in some obscure nook 
in the northern highlands of Scotland. 

We quitted London on the 27th of March, and remained a few 
days at Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. This was a new 
scene to us mountaineers ; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, 
and the herds of stately deer, were all novelties to us. 

From thence we proceeded to Oxford. As we entered this city, 
our minds were filled with the remembrance of the events that had 
been transacted there more than a century and a half before. It 
was here that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had 
remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his 
cause to join the standard of parliament and liberty. The memory 
of that unfortunate king, and his companions, the amiable Falkland, the insolent Gower, his queen, and son, gave a peculiar 
interest to every part of the city, which they might be supposed to 
have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here, 
and we delighted to trace its footsteps. If these feelings had not 
found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of the city had 
yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration. The 
colleges are ancient and picturesque ; the streets are almost magnificent ; and the lovely Isis, which flows beside it through meadows 
of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into a placid expanse of waters, 
which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers and spires and 
domes imbosomed among aged trees. 

I enjoyed this scene ; and yet my enjoyment was imbittered both 
by the memory of the past, and the anticipation of the future. I 
was formed for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days, discontent never visited my mind ; and if I was ever overcome by 
e7t?iui the sight of what is beautiful in nature, or the study of what 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 1 27 

is excellent and sublime in the productions of man, could always 
interest my heart, and communicate elasticity to my spirits. But I 
am a blasted tree ; the bolt has entered my soul : and I felt then 
that I should survive to exhibit, vhat I shall soon cease to be,  a 
miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity, pitiable to others, and 
abhorrent to myself. 

We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its 
environs, and endeavoring to identify every spot which might 
relate to the most animating epoch of English history. Our little 
voyages of discovery were often prolonged by the successive objects 
that presented themselves. We visited the tomb of the illustrious 
Hampden, and the field on which that patriot fell. For a moment 
my soul was elevated from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas of liberty and self-sacrifice, of which these 
sights were the monuments and the remembrances. For an instant 
I dared to shake of my chains, and look around me with a free 
and lofty spirit; but the iron had eaten into my flesh, and I sank 
again, trembling and hopeless, into my miserable self. 

We left Oxford with regret, and proceeded to Matlock, which was 
our next place of rest. The country in the neighborhood of this 
village resembled, to a greater degree, the scenery of Switzerland; 
but every thing is on a lower scale, and the green hills want the 
crown of distant white Alps, which always attend on the piny 
mountains of my native country. We visited the wondrous cave, 
and the little cabinets of natural history, where the curiosities are 
disposed of in the same manner as in the collections at Servox and 
Chamonix. The latter name made me tremble, when pronounced 
by Henry ; and I hastened to quit Matlock, with which that terrible 
scene was thus associated. 

From Derby still journeying northward, we passed two months 
in Cumberland and Westmoreland. I could now almost fancy 
myself among the Swiss mountains. The little patches of snow 
which yet lingered on the northern sides of the mountains, the 
lakes, and the dashing of the rocky streams, were all familiar and 
dear sights to me. Here also we made some acquaintances, who 
almost contrived to cheat me into happiness. The delight of Clerval was proportionably greater than mine; his mind expanded in 
the company of men of talent, and he found in his own nature 
greater capacities and resources than he could have imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his inferiors. ''I 
could pass my life here," said he to me; " and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine." 



128 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

But he found that a traveller's life is one that includes much pain 
amid its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the stretch ; and 
when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to 
quit that on which he rests in pleasure for something new, which 
again engages his attention, and which also he forsakes for other 
novelties. 

We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and 
Westmoreland, and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants, when the period of our appointment with our Scotch 
friend approached, and we left them to travel on. For my own 
part I was not sorry. I had now neglected my promise for some 
time, and I feared the effects of the demon's disappointment. He 
might remain in Switzerland, and wreak his vengeance on my 
relatives. This idea pursued me, and tormented me at every moment from which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. 
I waited for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were 
delayed, I was miserable, and overcome by a thousand fears ; and 
when they arrived, and I saw the superscription of Elizabeth or my 
father, I hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate. Sometimes I 
thought that the fiend followed me, and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion. When these thoughts possessed me, I would not quit Henry for a moment, but followed him 
as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of his destroyer. 
I felt as if I had committed some great crime, the consciousness of 
which haunted me. I was guiltless, but I had indeed drawn a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime. 

I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that 
city might have interested the most unfortunate being. Clerval did 
not like it so well as Oxford; for the antiquity of the latter city was 
more pleasing to him. But the beauty and regularity of the new 
town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle, and its environs, the most 
delightful in the world, Arthur's Seat, St. Bernard's Well, and the 
Pentland Hills, compensated him for the change, and filled him with 
cheerfulness and admiration. But I was impatient to arrive at the 
termination of my journey. 

We left Edinburgh in a week, passed through Coupar, St. Andrews, and along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friends 
expected us. But I was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers, or enter into their feelings or plans with the good humor expected from a guest; and accordingly I told Clerval that I wished 
to make the tour of Scotland alone. "Do you," said I, ''enjoy 
yourself, and let this be our rendezvous. I may be absent a month 



 THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 1 29 

or two ; but do not interfere with my motions, I entreat you : leave 
me to peace and solitude for a short time ; and when I return, I 
hope it will be with a lighter heart, more congenial to your own 
temper." 

Henry wished to dissuade me ; but, seeing me bent on this plan, 
ceased to remonstrate. He entreated me to write often. " I had 
rather be with you," he said, ''in your solitary rambles, than with 
these Scotch people, whom I do not know : hasten, then, my dear 
friend, to return, that I may again feel myself somewhat at home, 
which I cannot do in your absence." 

Having parted from my friend, I determined to visit some remote 
spot of Scotland, and finish my work in solitude. I did not doubt 
but that the monster followed me, and would discover himself to 
me when I should have finished, that he might receive his companion. 

With this resolution, I traversed the northern highlands, and fixed 
on one of the remotest Orkneys as the scene of my labors. It was 
a place fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a rock, whose 
high sides were continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil 
was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a few miserable cows, and 
oatmeal for its inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose 
gaunt and scraggy limbs gave tokens of their miserable fare. Vegetables and bread, when they indulged in such luxuries, and even 
fresh water, were to be procured from the mainland, which was 
about five miles distant. 

On the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one 
of these was vacant when I arrived. This I hired. It contained 
but two rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most 
miserable penury. The thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the door was off its hinges. I ordered it to be repaired, 
bought some furniture, and took possession; an incident which 
would, doubtless, have occasioned some surprise, had not all the 
senses of the cottagers been benumbed by want and squalid poverty. 
As it was, I lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for 
the pittance of food and clothes which I gave ; so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men. 

In this retreat I devoted the morning to labor; but in the evening, 
when the weather permitted, I walked on the stony beach of the 
sea, to listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my feet. It 
was a monotonous yet ever-changing scene. I thought of Switzerland; it was far different from this desolate and appalling landscape. Its hills are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered 

9 



130 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

thickly in the plains. Its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky; 
and, when troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of 
a lively infant, when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean. 

In this manner I distributed my occupations when I first arrived; 
but, as I proceeded in my labor, it became every day more horrible 
and irksome to me. Sometimes I could not prevail on myself to 
enter my laboratory for several days ; and at other times I toiled 
day and night in order to complete my work.' It was, indeed, a 
filthy process in which I was engaged. During my first experiment, 
a kind of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me to the horror of my 
employment; my mind was intently fixed on the sequel of my labor, 
and my eyes were shut to the horror of my proceedings. But now 
I went to it in cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work 
of my hands. 

Thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant call my 
attention from the actual scene in which I was engaged, my spirits 
became unequal ; I grew restless and nervous. Every moment I 
feared to meet my persecutor. Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed 
on the ground, fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the 
object which I so much dreaded to behold. I feared to wander from 
the sight of my fellow-creatures, lest when alone he should come to 
claim his companion. 

In the mean time I worked on, and my labor was already considerably advanced. I looked towards its completion with a tremulous 
and eager hope, which I dared not trust myself to question, but 
which was intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil, that made 
my heart sicken in my bosom. 



I 



CHAPTER XIX. 

SAT one evening in my laboratory ; the sun had set, and the 
moon was just rising from the sea; I had not suf!icient light for 
my employment, and I remained idle in a pause of consideration 
of whether I should leave my labor for the night, or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention to it. As I sat, a train of reflection occurred to me, which led me to consider the effects of what 
I was now doing. Three years before, I was engaged in the same 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I3I 

manner, and had created a fiend whose unparalleled barbarity had 
desolated my heart, and filled it for ever with the bitterest remorse. 
I was now about to form another being, of whose dispositions I was 
alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant than her mate, and delight, for its own sake, in murder and 
wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the neighborhood of man, 
and hide himself in deserts; but she had not; and she, who in all 
probability was to become a thinking and reasoning animal, might 
refuse to comply with a compact made before her creation. They 
might even hate each other; the creature who already lived, loathed 
his own deformity; and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence 
for it when it came before his eyes in the female form. She also 
might turn with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man ; she 
might quit him, and he be again alone, exasperated by the fresh 
provocation of being deserted by one of his own species. 

Even if they were to leave Europe, and inhabit the deserts of the 
new world, yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which 
the demon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be 
propagated upon the earth, who might make the very existence of 
the species of man a condition precarious and full of terror. Had 
I a right, for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting 
generations ? I had before been moved by the sophisms of the being I had created ; I had been struck senseless by his fiendish 
threats ; but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my promise 
burst upon me; I shuddered to think that future ages might curse 
me as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own 
peace at the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human 
race. 

I trembled, and my heart failed within me ; when, on looking up, 
I saw by the light of the moon, the demon at the casement. A 
ghastly grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task which he had allotted to me. Yes : he had followed 
me in my travels ; he had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, 
or taken refuge in wide and desert heaths ; and he now came to 
mark my progress, and claim the fulfilment of my promise. 

As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent 
of malice and treachery. I thought with a sensation of madness 
on my promise of creating another like to him, and, trembling with 
passion, tore to pieces the thing on which I was engaged. The 
wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence he 
depended for happiness, and, with a howl of devilish despair and 
revenge, withdrew. 



132 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

I left the room, and, locking the door, made a solemn vow in my 
own heart never to resume my labors ; and then, with trembling 
steps, I sought my own apartment. I was alone; none were near 
me to dissipate the gloom, and relieve me from the sickening oppression of the most terrible reveries. 

Several hours passed, and I remained near my window, gazing on 
the sea; it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and 
all nature reposed under the eye of the quiet moon. A few fishingvessels alone specked the water, and now and then the gentle 
breeze wafted the sound of voices, as the fishermen called to one 
another. I felt the silence, although I was hardly conscious of its 
extreme profundity, until my ear was suddenly arrested by the 
paddling of oars near the shore, and a person landed close to my 
house. 

In a few minutes after, I heard the creaking of my door, as if 
some one endeavored to open it softly. I trembled from head to 
foot : I felt a presentiment of who it was, and wished to rouse one 
of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I 
was overcome by the sensation of helplessness,  so often felt in 
frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavor to fly from an impending danger,  and was rooted to the spot. 

Presently I heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the 
door opened, and the wretch whom I dreaded appeared. Shutting 
the door, he approached me, and said, in a smothered voice,  

''You have destroyed the work which you began; what is it you 
intend? Do you dare to break your promise .' I have endured toil 
and misery; I left Switzerland with you; I crept along the shores 
of the Rhine, among its willow islands, and over the summits of its 
hills. I have dwelt many months in the heaths of England, and 
among the deserts of Scotland. I have endured incalculable fatigue 
and cold and hunger; do you dare destroy my hopes ." 

''Begone! I do break my promise : never will I create another 
like yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness." 

" Slave, I before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself 
unworthy of my condescension. Remember that I have power; 
you believe yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretched that 
the light of day will be hateful to you. You are my creator, but I 
am your master ; obey ! " 

"The hour of my weakness is past, and the period of your power 
is arrived. Your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness ; but they confirm me in a resolution of not creating yo a 
companion in vice. Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 1 33 

a demon, whoise delight is in death and wretchedness? Begone! I 
am firm, and your words will only exasperate my rage." 

The monster saw my determination in my face, and gnashed his 
teeth in the impotence of anger. '' Shall each man," cried he, '' find 
a wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and I be alone.? 
I had feelings of aftection, and they were requited by detestation 
and scorn. Man, you may hate ; but, beware ! your hours will pass 
in dread and misery, and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish 
from you your happiness for ever. Are you to be happy, while I 
grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my 
other passions ; but revenge remains,  revenge, henceforth dearer 
than light or food ! I may die ; but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your misery. Beware; 
for I am fearless, and therefore powerful. I will watch with the 
wiliness of a snake, that I may sting with its venom. Man, you 
shall repent of the injuries you inflict." 

"Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of 
malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and I am no coward 
to bend beneath words. Leave me : I am inexorable." 
It is well. I go; but remember, I shall be with you on your 
wedding-night." 

I started forward, and exclaimed, "Villain! before you sign my 
death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe." 

I would have seized him ; but he eluded me, and quitted the house 
with precipitation : in a few moments I saw him in his boat, which 
shot across the waters with an arrowy swiftness, and was soon lost 
amid the waves. 

All was again silent; but his words rung in my ears. I burned 
with rage to pursue the murderer of my peace, and precipitate him 
into the ocean. I walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination conjured up a thousand images to 
torment and sting me. Why had I not followed him, and closed 
with him in mortal strife? But I had suffered him to depart, and 
he had directed his course toward the mainland. I shuddered to 
think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge. And then I thought again of his words,  " I wi'll be ivith 
you on your weddhig-ntght. That, then, was the period for the fulfilment of my destiny. In that hour I should die, and at once satisfy and extinguish his malice. The prospect did not move me to 
fear; yet when I thought of my beloved Elizabeth,  of her tears 
and endless sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbarously 
snatched from her,  tears, the first I had shed for many months, 



134 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

streamed from my eyes, and I resolved not to fall before my enemy 
without a bitter struggle. 

The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my 
feelings became calmer, if it may be called calmness, when the violence of rage sinks into the depth of despair. I left the house, the 
horrid scene of the last night's contention, and walked on the beach 
of the sea, which I almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and my fellow-creatures; nay, a wish that such should 
prove the fact stole across me. I desired that I might pass my life 
on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, but uninterrupted by any 
sudden shock of miser3 If I returned, it was to be sacrificed, or to 
see those whom I most loved die under the grasp of a demon whom 
I had myself created. 

I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all 
it loved, and miserable in the separation. When it became noon, 
and the sun rose higher, I lay down on the grass, and was overpowered by a deep sleep. I had been awake the whole of the preceding night : my nerves were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by 
watching and misery. The sleep into which I now sunk refreshed me ; and when I awoke, I again felt as if I belonged to a 
race of human beings like myself, and I began to reflect upon what 
had passed with greater composure; yet still the words of the fiend 
rung in my ears like a death-knell, they appeared like a dream, yet 
distinct and oppressive as a reality. 

The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore, satisfying 
my appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when 
I saw a fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought 
me a packet; it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval, entreating me to join him. He said that nearly a year had 
elapsed since we had quitted Switzerland, and France was yet unvisited. He entreated me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle, and 
meet him at Perth, in a week from that time, when we might 
arrange the plan of our future proceedings. This letter in a degree 
recalled me to life, and I determined to quit my island at the expiration of two dajs. 

Yet, before I departed, there was a task to perform, on which I 
shuddered to reflect : I must pack my chemical instruments ; and 
for that purpose I must enter the room which had been the scene 
of my odious work, and I must handle those utensils, the sight of 
which was sickening to me. The next morning, at daybreak, I 
summoned suflficient courage, and unlocked the door of my laboratory. The remains of the half-finished creature, whom I had de


THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I35 

stroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and I almost felt as if I had 
mangled the living flesh of a human being. I paused to collect 
myself, and then entered the chamber. With trembling hand I conveyed the instruments out of the room ; but I reflected that I ought 
not to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion 
of the peasants, and I accordingly put them into a basket, with a 
great quantity of stones, and, laying them up, determined to throw 
them into the sea that very night; and in the mean time I sat 
upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging my chemical 
apparatus. 

Nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had 
taken place in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the 
demon. I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair, 
as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled ; but 
I now felt as if a film had been taken from before my eyes, and that 
I, for the first time, saw clearly. The idea of renewing my labors 
did not for one instant occur to me ; the threat I had heard weighed 
on my thoughts, but I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine 
could avert it. I had resolved in my own mind, that to create 
another like the flend I had first made would be an act of the basest 
and most atrocious selfishness ; and I banished from my mind 
every thought that could lead to a diff'erent conclusion. 

Between two and three in the morning, the moon rose ; and I 
then, putting my basket aboard a little skiff", sailed out about four 
miles from the shore. The scene was perfectly solitary: a few 
boats were returning towards land, but I sailed awaj'- from them. 
I felt as if I was about the commission of a dreadful crime, and 
avoided with shuddering anxiety any encounter with my fellowcreatures. At one time the moon, which had before been clear, 
was suddenly overspread by a thick cloud, and I took advantage of 
the moment of darkness, and cast my basket into the sea; I listened 
to the gurgling sound as it sunk, and then sailed away from the 
spot. The sky became clouded ; but the air was pure, although 
chilled by the north-east breeze that was then rising. But it refreshed me, and filled me with such agreeable sensations, that I 
resolved to prolong my stay on the water, and, fixing the rudder 
in a direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the boat. 
Clouds hid the moon, every thing was obscure, and I heard only 
the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves ; the murmur lulled me, and in a short time I slept soundly. 

I do not know how long I remained in this situation, but when I 
awoke I found that the sun had already mounted considerably. 



136 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

The wind was high, and the waves continually threatened the safety 
of my little skiff. I found that the wind was north-east, and must 
have driven me far from the coast from which I had embarked. 
I endeavored to change my course, but quickly found that if I again 
made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with water. 
Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. 
I confess that I felt a few sensations of terror. I had no compass 
with me, and was so little acquainted with the geography of this 
part of the world that the sun was of little benefit to me. I might 
be driven into the wide Atlantic, and feel all the tortures of starvation, or be swallowed up in the immeasurable waters that roared 
and buffeted around me. I had already been out many hours, and 
felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that 
flew before the wind only to be replaced by others : I looked upon 
the sea  it was to be my grave.' Fiend," I exclaimed, 'your 
task is already fulfilled ! " I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, 
and of Clerval ; and sunk into a reverie, so despairing and frightful, that even now, when the scene is on the point of closing before 
me for ever, I shudder to reflect on it. 

Some hours passed thus ; but by degrees, as the sun declined 
towards the horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze, 
and the sea became free from breakers. But these gave place to a 
heavy swell ; I felt sick, and hardly able to hold the rudder, when 
suddenly I saw a line of high land towards the south. 

Although spent, as I was, by fatigue, and the dreadful suspense I 
endured for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like 
a flood of warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes. 

How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging 
love we have of life, even in the excess of misery! I constructed 
another sail with a part of my dress, and eagerly steered my course 
towards the land. It had a wild and rocky appearance ; but, as I 
approached nearer, I easily perceived the traces of cultivation. 
I saw vessels near the shore, and found myself suddenly transported back to the neighborhood of civilized man. I eagerly traced 
the windings of the land, and hailed a steeple which I at length 
saw issuing from behind a small promontory. As I was in a state 
of extreme debility, I resolved to sail directly towards the town as 
a place where I could most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately I had money with me. As I turned the promontory, I 
perceived a small neat town and a good harbor, which I entered, 
my heart bounding with joy at my most unexpected escape. As I 



THE MODERN PR0METH:EUS. I37 

was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several 
people crowded towards the spot. Thej seemed very much surprised at my appearance ; but, instead of offering me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that at any other time 
might have produced in me a slight sensation of alarm. As it 
was, I merely remarked that they spoke English ; and I therefore 
addressed them in that language : " My good friends," said I, '' will 
you be so kind as to tell me the name of this town, and inform me 
where I am ? " 
' You will know that soon enough," replied a man with a gruff 
voice. ''Maybe you are come to a place that will not prove much 
to your taste ; but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, I 
promise you." 

I was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from 
a stranger; and I was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning 
and angry countenances of his companions. ''Why do you answer 
me so roughly?" I replied: "surely it is not the custom of Englishmen to receive strangers so inhospitably." 

"I do not know," said the man, "what the custom of the English 
may be; but it is the custom of the Irish to hate villains." 

While this strange dialogue continued, I perceived the crowd 
rapidly increased. Their faces expressed a mixture of curiosity 
and anger, which annoyed, and in some degree alarmed me. I 
inquired the way to the inn ; but no one replied. I then moved 
forward, and a murmuring sound arose from the crowd as they 
followed and surrounded me ; when an ill-looking man, approaching, tapped me on the shoulder, and said, " Come, sir, you must 
follow me to Mr. Kirwin's to give an account of yourself." 

"Who is Mr. Kirwin. Why am I to give an account of myself? 
Is not this a free country?" 

"Aye, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate, and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman 
who was found murdered here last night." 

This answer startled me ; but I presently recovered myself. I 
was innocent; that could easily be proved: accordingly I followed 
my conductor in silence, and was led to one of the best houses in 
the town. I was ready to sink from fatigue and hunger; but, being 
surrounded by a crowd, I thought it politic to rouse all my strength, 
that no physical debility might be construed into apprehension or 
conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a 
few moments to overwhelm me, and extinguish in horror and 
despair all fear of ignominy and death. 



I3S FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

I must pause here ; for it requires all my fortitude to recall the 
memory of the frightful events which I am about to relate, in proper 
detail, to my recollection. 



CHAPTER XX. 

T WAS soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an 
 old benevolent man, with calm and mild manners. He looked 
upon me, however, with some degree of severity, and then, turning 
towards my conductors, he asked who appeared as witnesses on 
this occasion. 

About half a dozen men came forward ; and one being selected 
by the magistrate, he deposed, that he had been out fishing the 
night before with his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nugent, when, 
about ten o'clock, they observed a strong northerly blast rising, 
and they accordingly put in for port. It was a very dark night, as 
the moon had not yet risen ; they did not land at the harbor, but, 
as they had been accustomed, at a creek about two miles below. He 
walked on first, carrying a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was proceeding 
along the sands, he struck his foot against something, and fell all 
his length on the ground. His companions came up to assist him; 
and, by the light of their lantern, they found that he had fallen on 
the body of a man who was to all appearance dead. 

Their first supposition was, that it was the corpse of some person 
who had been drowned, and was thrown on shore by the waves; 
but, upon examination, they found that the clothes were not wet, 
and even that the body was not then cold. They instantly carried 
it to the cottage of an old woman near the spot, and endeavored, 
but in vain, to restore it to life. He appeared to be a handsome 
young man, about five and twenty years of age. He had apparently 
been strangled, for there was no sign of any violence, except the 
black mark of fingers on his neck. 

The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, 
but when the mark of the fingers was mentioned, I remembered the 
murder of my brother, and felt myself extremely agitated ; my 
limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which obliged me 
to lean on a chair for support. The magistrate observed me with 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I39 

a keen eye, and of course drew an unfavorable augury from my 
manner. 

The son confirmed the father's account : but when Daniel Nugent 
was called, he swore positively, that, just before the fall of his companion, he saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance 
from the shore ; and, as far as he could judge by the light of a few 
stars, it was the same boat in which I had just landed. 

A woman deposed, that she lived near the beach, and was standing at the door of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before she heard of the discovery of the body, 
when she saw a boat, with only one man in it, push off from that 
part of the shore where the corpse was afterwards found. 

Another woman confirmed the account of the fisherman having 
brought the body into her house ; it was not cold. They put it into 
a bed, and rubbed it; and Daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. 

Several other men were examined concerning my landing; and 
they agreed, that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it was very probable that I had beaten about for many 
hours, and had been obliged to return nearly to the same spot from 
which I had departed. Besides, they observed that it appeared that 
I had brought the body from another place, and it was likely, that, 
as I did not appear to know the shore, I might have put into the 

harbor, ignorant of the distance of the town of from the place 

where I had deposited the corpse. 

Mr. Kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that I should be 
taken into the room where the body lay for interment, that it might 
be observed what effect the sight of it would produce upon me. 

This idea was probably suggested by the extreme agitation I had 
exhibited when the mode of the murder had been described. I was 
accordingly conducted, by the magistrate and several other persons, to the inn. I could not help being struck by the strange 
coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but, 
knowing that I had been conversing with several persons in the 
island I had inhabited about the time that the body had been found, 
I was perfectly tranquil as to the consequences of the affair. 

I entered the room where the corpse lay, and was led up to the 
coffin. How can I describe my sensations on beholding it. I feel 
yet parched with horror, nor can I reflect on that terrible moment 
without shuddering and agony, that faintly reminds me of the 
anguish of the recognition. The trial, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses, passed like a dream from my memory, when I 



140 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

saw the lifeless form of Henrj Clerval stretched before me. I 
gasped for breath ; and, throwing myself on the body, I exclaimed, 
''Have my murderous machinations deprived you also, my dearest 
Henry, of life? Two I have already destroyed; other victims await 
their destiny : but you, Clerval, my friend, my benefactor," 

The human frame could no longer support the agonizing suffering that I endured, and I was carried out of the room in strong 
convulsions. 

A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of 
death ; my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful ; I called 
myself murderer of William, of Justine, and of Clerval. Sometimes I entreated my attendants to assist me in the destruction of 
the fiend by whom I was tormented; and, at others, I felt the 
fingers of the monster grasping my neck, and I screamed aloud 
with agony and terror. Fortunately, as I spoke my native language, Mr. Kirwin alone understood me ; but my gestures and bitter 
cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses. 

Why did I not die.' More miserable than man ever was before, 
why did I not sink into forgetfulness and rest. Death snatches 
away many blooming children, the only hopes of their doating 
parents : how many brides and youthful lovers have been one day 
in the bloom of health and hope, and the next a prey for worms 
and the decay of the tomb ! Of what materials was I made, that I 
could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of the 
wheel, continually renewed the torture . 

But I was doomed to live ; and, in two months, found myself as 
awaking from a dream in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, 
surrounded by gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable 
apparatus of a dungeon. It was morning, I remember, when I 
thus awoke to understanding : I had forgotten the particulars of 
what had happened, and only felt as if some great misfortune had 
suddenly overwhelmed me; but when I looked around, and saw the 
barred windows, and the squalidness of the room in which I was, 
all flashed across my memory, and I groaned bitterly. 

This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair 
beside me. She was a hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, 
and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often 
characterize that class. The lines of her face were hard and rude, 
like those of persons accustomed to see without sympathizing in 
sights of misery. Her tone expressed her entire indifterence ; she 
addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one that I had 
heard during my sufferings :  



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I4I 
 Are you better now, sir?" said she. 

I replied in the same language, with a feeble voice, "I believe I 
am ; but if it be all true, if indeed I did not dream, I am sorry that 
I am still alive to feel this misery and horror." 
' For that matter," replied the old woman, ''if you mean about 
the gentleman you murdered, I believe that it were better for you if 
you were dead, for I fancy it will go hard with you ; but you will be 
hung when the next sessions come on. However, that's none of my 
business : I am sent to nurse you, and get you well ; I do my 
duty with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the 
same." 

I turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but 
I felt languid, and unable to reflect on all that had passed. The 
whole series of my life appeared to me as a dream ; I sometimes 
doubted if indeed it were all true, for it never presented itself to my 
mind with the force of reality. 

As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I grew 
feverish ; a darkness pressed around me ; no one was near me who 
soothed me with the gentle voice of love ; no deaf hand supported 
me. The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old 
woman prepared them for me ; but utter carelessness was visible in 
the first, and the expression of brutalitj was strongly marked in the 
visage of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the hangman who would gain his fee. 

These were my first reflections ; but I soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room 
in the prison to be prepared for me ; (wretched indeed was the best !) 
and it was he who had provided a physician and a nurse. It is true, 
he seldom came to see me ; for, although he ardently desired to relieve the suff'erings of every human creature, he did not wish to be 
present at the agonies and miserable ravings of a murderer. He 
came, therefore, sometimes to see that I was not neglected ; but his 
visits were short, and at long intervals. 

One day, when I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, 
my eyes half open, and my cheeks livid like those of death : I was 
overcome by gloom and misery, and often reflected I had better seek 
death than remain miserably pent up only to be let loose in a world 
replete with wretchedness. At one time I considered whether I 
should not declare myself guilty, and sufl'er the penalty of the law, 
less innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my thoughts, 
when the door of my apartment was opened, and Mr. Kirwin en


142 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

tered. His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he 
drew a chair close to mine, and addressed me in French,  
 I fear that this place is very shocking to you ; can I do any thing 
to make you more comfortable?" 

''I thank you; but all that you mention is nothing to me : on the 
whole earth there is no comfort which I am capable of receiving." 

'' I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune. But 
you will, I hope, soon quit this melancholy abode; for, doubtless, 
evidence can easily be brought to free you from the criminal 
charge." 

''That is my least concern : I am, by a course of strange events, 
become the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as 
I am and have been, can death be any evil to me." 

''Nothing, indeed, could be more unfortunate and agonizing than 
the strange chances that have lately occurred. You were thrown, 
by some surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality; seized immediately, and charged with murder. The first 
sight that was presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, 
murdered in so unaccountable a manner, and placed, as it were, by 
some fiend across your path." 

As Mr. Kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation I endured 
on this retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt considerable surprise 
at the knowledge he seemed to possess concerning me. I suppose 
some astonishment was exhibited in my countenance ; for Mr. Kirwin hastened to say,  

"It was not until a day or two after your illness, that I thought 
of examining your dress, that I might discover some trace by which 
I could send to your relations -an account of your misfortune and 
illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I discovered from its commencement to be from your father. I instantly 
wrote to Geneva : nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter. But you are ill ; even now you tremble : you are 
unfit for agitation of any kind." 

"This suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible 
event: tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose 
murder I am now to lament." 

" Your family is perfectly well," said Mr. Kirwin, with gentleness ; 
" and some one, a friend, is come to visit you." 

I know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, 
but it instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to 
mock at my misery, and taunt me with the death of Clerval, as a 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I43 

new incitement for me to comply with his hellish desires. I put my 
hand before my eyes, and cried out in agony,  

"Oh, take him away! I cannot see him; for God's sake, do not 
let him enter! " 

Mr. Kirwin regarded me with a troubled countenance. He could 
not help regarding my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt, 
and said, in rather a severe tone,  

"I should have thought, young man, that the presence of your 
father would have been welcome, instead of inspiring such violent 
repugnance." 

" My father ! " cried I, while every feature and every muscle was 
relaxed from anguish to pleasure. "Is my father, indeed, come. 
How kind, how very kind ! But where is he ; why does he not hasten to me ? " 

My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate ; perhaps he thought that my former exclamation was a momentary 
return of delirium, and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence. He rose and quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it. 

Nothing, at this moment, could have given me greater pleasure 
than the arrival of my father. I stretched out my hand to him, 
and cried,  

"Are you then safe  and Elizabeth  and Ernest." 

My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare, and endeavored, by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, 
to raise my desponding spirits ; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness. "What a place is this that you 
inhabit, my son ! " said he, looking mournfullyt the barred windows and wretched appearance of the room.. "You travelled to 
seek happiness, but a fatality seems to pursue you. And poor 
Clerval " 

The name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too great to be endured in my weak state ; I shed tears. 

"Alas! yes, my father," replied I; "some destiny of the most 
horrid kind hangs over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or surely I 
should have died on the coffin of Henry." 

We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the 
precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary 
that could insure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin came in, and insisted 
that my strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion. 
But the appearance of my father was to me like that of my good 
angel, and I gradually recovered my health. 



144 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

As my sickness quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black 
melancholy, that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval 
was for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. More than once the 
agitation into which these reflections threw me made my friends 
dread a dangerous relapse. Alas ! why did they preserve so miserable and detested a life? It was surely that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh! very soon, will 
death extinguish these throbbings, and relieve me from the mighty 
weight of anguish that bears me to the dust; and, in executing the 
award of justice, I shall sink to rest. Then the appearance of death 
was distant, although the wish was ever present to my thoughts ; 
and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for 
some mighty revolution that might bury me and my destroyer in 
its ruins. 

The season of the assizes approached. I had already been three 
months in prison ; and, although I was still weak, and in continual 
danger of a relapse, I was obliged to travel nearly a hundred miles 
to the county-town, where the court was held. Mr. Kirwin charged 
himself with every care of collecting witnesses, and arranging my 
defence. I was spared the disgrace of appearing publicly as a 
criminal, as the case was not brought before the court that decides 
on life and death. The grand jury rejected the bill, on its being 
proved that I was on the Orkney Islands at the hour the body of my 
friend was found, and a fortnight after my removal I was liberated 
from prison. 

My father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations 
of a criminal charge, that I was again allowed to breathe the fresh 
atmosphere, and allowed to return to my native country. I did not 
participate in these feelings ; for to me the walls of a dungeon or a 
palace were alike hateful. The cup of life was poisoned for ever; 
and although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of 
heart, I saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, 
penetrated by no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared 
upon me. Sometimes they were the expressive eyes of Henry, 
languishing in death, the dark orbs nearly covered by the lids, and 
the long black lashes that fringed them ; sometimes it was the 
watery clouded eyes of the monster, as I first saw them in my 
chamber of Ingolstadt. 

My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection. He 
talked of Geneva,  which I should soon visit,  of Elizabeth and 
Ernest; but these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes, indeed, I felt a wish for happiness ; and thought, with melan


THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I45 

choly delight, of my beloved cousin ; or longed, with a devouring 
maladie du pays to see once more the blue lake and rapid Rhone 
that had been so dear to me in early childhood : but my general 
state of feeling was a torpor, in which a prison was as welcome a 
residence as the divinest scene in nature ; and these fits were seldom interrupted, but by paroxysms of anguish and despair. At 
moments I often endeavored to put an end to the existence I 
loathed ; and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance to restrain me from committing some dreadful act of violence. 

I remember, as I quitted the prison, I heard one of the men say, 
'' He may be innocent of the murder, but he has certainly a bad 
conscience." These words struck me. A bad conscience ! yes, 
surely I had one. William, Justine, and Clerval had died through 
my infernal machinations; "And whose death," cried I, "is to 
finish the tragedy? Ah! my father, do not remain in this wretched 
country ; take me where I may forget myself, my existence, and all 
the world." 

My father easily acceded to my desire ; and, after having taken 
leave of Mr. Kirwin, we hastened to Dublin. I felt as if I was 
relieved from a heavy weight, when the packet sailed with a fair 
wind from Ireland, and I had quitted for ever the country which had 
been to me the scene of so much misery. 

It was midnight. My father slept in the cabin ; and I lay on the 
deck, looking at the stars, and listening to the dashing of the waves. 
I hailed the darkness that shut Ireland from my sight, and my pulse 
beat with a feverish joy, when I reflected I should soon see Geneva. 
The past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream ; yet the 
vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested 
shore of Ireland, and the sea which surrounded me, told me too 
forcibly that I was deceived by no vision, and that Clerval, my 
friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and the 
monster of my creation. I repassed, in my memory, my whole life; 
my quiet happiness while residing with my family in Geneva, the 
death of my mother, and my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered shuddering at the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the 
creation of my hideous enemy, and I called to mind the night 
during which he first lived. I was unable to pursue the train 
of thought; a thousand feelings pressed upon me, and I wept 
bitterly. 

Ever since my recovery from the fever, I had been in the custom 
of taking every night a small quantity of laudanum; for it was by 
means of this drug only that I was enabled to gain the rest neces
10 



14 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

sarj for the preservation of life. Oppressed bj the recollection of 
my various misfortunes, I now took a double dose, and soon slept 
profoundly. But sleep did not afford me respite from thought and 
misery; my dreams presented a thousand objects that scared me. 
Towards morning I was possessed by a kind of nightmare; I felt 
the fiend's grasp on my neck, and could not free myself from it; 
groans and cries rung in my ears. My father, who was watching 
over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me, and pointed to the 
port of Holyhead, which we were now entering. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

TT 7E had resolved not to go to London, but to cross the country 

  to Portsmouth, and thence embark for Havre. I preferred 
this plan, principally because I dreaded again to see those places in 
which I had enjoyed a few moments of tranquillity with my beloved 
Clerval. I thought with horror of seeing again those persons 
whom we had been accustomed to visit together, and who might 
make inquiries concerning an event, the very remembrance of 
which made me again feel the pang I endured when I gazed on his 
lifeless form in the inn at . 

As for my father, his desires and exertions were bounded to the 
again seeing me restored to health and peace of mind. His tenderness and attentions were unremitting; my grief and gloom were 
obstinate, but he would not despair. Sometimes he thought that I 
felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of 
murder, and he endeavored to prove to me the futility of pride. 
' Alas ! my father," said I, " how little do you know me ! Human 
beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded, if 
such a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was 
as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; 
and I am the cause of this ; I murdered her. William, Justine, and 
Henry,  they all died by my hands." 

My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make 
the same assertion ; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes 
seemed to desire an explanation, and at others he appeared to consider it as caused by delirium, and that, during my illness, some 
idea of this kind had presented itself to my imagination, the re


THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I47 

membrance of which I preserved in my convalescence. I avoided 
explanation, and maintained a continual silence concerning the 
wretch I had created. I had a feeling that I should be supposed 
mad, and this for ever chained my tongue, when I would have given 
the whole world to have confided the fatal secret. 

Upon this occasion, my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder, "What do you mean, Victor? are you mad? My 
dear son, I entreat you never to make such an assertion." 

'' I am not mad," I cried energetically ; " the sun and the heavens, 
who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I 
am the assassin of those most innocent victims ; they died by my 
machinations. A thousand times would I have shed my own blood, 
drop by drop, to have saved their lives; but I could not, my father, 
indeed I could not sacrifice the whole human race." 

The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas 
were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our conversation, and endeavored to alter the course of my thoughts. 

He wished, as much as possible, to obliterate the memory of the 
scenes that had taken place in Ireland, and never alluded to them, 
or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes. 

As time passed awaj, I became more calm : my misery had her 
dwelling in my heart, but I no longer talked in the same incoherent 
manner of my own crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness 
of them. By the utmost self-violence I curbed the imperious voice 
of wretchedness, which sometimes desired to declare itself to the 
whole world ; and my manners were calmer and more composed 
than they had ever been since my journey to the sea of ice. 

We arrived at Havre on the 8th of May, and instantly proceeded 
to Paris, where my father had some business, which detained us a 
few weeks. In this city, I received the following letter from Elizabeth :  
'To Victor Frankenstein. 
My dearest Friend,  It gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle dated at Paris : you are no longer at a 
formidable distance, and I may hope to see you in less than a fortnight. My poor cousin, how much you must have suff'ered ! I expect 
to see you looking even more ill than when you quitted Geneva. 
This winter has been passed most miserably, tortured as I have been 
by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see peace in your countenance, 
and to find that your heart is not totally devoid of comfort and 
tranquillity. 



I4S FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

''Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so 
miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would 
not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh 
upon you; but a conversation that I had with my uncle previous to 
his departure, renders some explanation necessary before we meet. 

''Explanation! you may possibly say ; what can Elizabeth have 
to explain? If you really say this, my questions are answered, and 
I have no more to do than to sign myself your affectionate cousin. 
But you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread, 
and yet be pleased with this explanation; and, in a probability of 
this being the case, I dare not any longer postpone writing what, 
during your absence, I have often wished to express to you, but have 
never had the courage to begin. 

"You well know, Victor, that our union had been the favorite 
plan of your parents ever since our infancy. We were told this 
when young, and taught to look forward to it as an event that would 
certainly take place. We were affectionate play-fellows during 
childhood, and, I believe, dear and valued friends to one another as 
we grew older. But as brother and sister often entertain a lively 
affection towards each other, without desiring a more intimate 
union, may not such also be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor. 
Answer me, I conjure you, by our mutual happiness, with simple 
truth,  Do you not love another? 

"You have travelled ; you have spent several years of your life 
at Ingolstadt ; and I confess to you, my friend, that, when I saw you 
last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude, from the society of every 
creature, I could not help supposing that you might regret our connection, and believe yourself bound in honor to fulfil the wishes of 
your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is false reasoning. I confess to j'ou, my cousin, 
that I love you, and that in my airy dreams of futuritj you have 
been my constant friend and companion. But it is your happiness 
I desire as well as my own, when I declare to you that our marriage 
would render me eternally miserable, unless it were the dictate of 
your own free choice. Even now I weep to think, that, borne down 
as you are by the cruellest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word 
honor all hope of that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I, who have so interested an affection for 
you, may increase your miseries tenfold, by being an obstacle to 
your wishes. Ah, Victor, be assured that your cousin and playmate 
has too sincere a love for jou not to be made miserable by this supposition. Be happy, vny friend; and, if you obey me in this one 



THE MODERN PilOMKTHEUS. I49 

request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will have power to 

interrupt my tranquillity. 
'Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer it to-morrow, 

or the next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. 

My uncle will send me news of your health ; and if I see but one 

smile on your lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other 

exertion of mine, I shall need no other happiness. 

''Elizabeth Lavenza. 
" Geneva, May i8th, 17  ." 

This letter revived in my memory what I had before forgotten, 
the threat of the fiend,  ' I will be vjith you on your weddingnigJit!'' Such was my sentence, and on that night would the demon employ every art to destroy me, and tear me from the glimpse 
of happiness which promised partly to console my sufferings. On 
that night he had determined to consummate his crimes by my 
death. Well, be it so; a deadly struggle would then assuredly take 
place, in which, if he was victorious, I should be at peace, and his 
power over me be at an end. If he were vanquished, I should be a 
free man. Alas! what freedom? such as the peasant enjoys when 
his family have been massacred before his eyes, his cottage burnt, 
his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless, penniless, 
and alone, but free. Such would be my liberty, except that in my 
Elizabeth I possessed a treasure ; alas ! balanced by those horrors 
of remorse and guilt, which would pursue me until death. 

Sweet and beloved Elizabeth ! I read and re-read her letter, and 
some softened feelings stole into my heart, and dared to whisper 
paradisiacal dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already 
eaten, and the angel's arm bared to drive me from all hope. Yet I 
would die to make her happy. If the monster executed his threat, 
death was inevitable ; yet, again, I considered whether my marriage 
would hasten my fate. My destruction might, indeed, arrive a fewmonths sooner; but, if my torturer should suspect that I postponed 
it, influenced by his menaces, he would surely find other, and perhaps more dreadful, means of revenge. He had vowed to be zvitk 
77ie on my wedding-nighty yet he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace in the mean time ; for, as if to show me that he 
was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, 
that if my immediate union with my cousin would conduce either 
to her or my father's happiness, my adversary's designs against my 
life should not retard it a single hour. 



150 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

In this state of mind I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm 
and affectionate.I fear, my beloved girl," I said, Mittle happiness remains for us on earth; yet all that I may one day enjoy is 
concentred in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I 
consecrate my life, and my endeavors for contentment. I have one 
secret, Elizabeth, a dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill 
3our frame with horror, and then, far from being surprised at my 
misery, you will only wonder that I survive what I have endured. 
I will confide this tale of misery and terror to you the day after our 
marriage shall take place ; for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us. But, until then, I conjure you, do not 
mention or allude to it. This I most earnestly entreat, and I know 
you will comply." 

In about a week after the arrival of Elizabeth's letter, we returned 
to Geneva. My cousin welcomed me with warm affection ; yet tears 
were in her eyes, as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish 
cheeks. I saw a change in her also. She was thinner, and had lost 
much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me ; but 
her gentleness, and soft looks of compassion, made her a more fit 
companion for one blasted and miserable as I was. 

The tranquillity which I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory 
brought madness with it; and when I thought on what had passed, 
a real insanity possessed me; sometimes I was furious, and burnt 
with rage, sometimes low and despondent. I neither spoke nor 
looked, but sat motionless, bewildered by the multitude of miseries 
that overcame me. 

Elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits ; her 
gentle voice would soothe me when transported  passion, and 
inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept 
with me, and for me. When reason returned, she would remonstrate, and endeavor to inspire me with resignation. Ah! it is well 
for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the guilty there is no 
peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is otherwise 
sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief. 

Soon after my arrival, my father spoke of my immediate marriage 
with my cousin. I remained silent. 
' Have you, then, some other attachment." 

'None on earth. I love Elizabeth, and look forward to our 
union with delight. Let the day therefore be fixed ; and on it 
I will consecrate myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my 
cousin." 

'' My dear Victor, do not speak thus. Heavy misfortunes have 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I5I 

befallen us ; but let us only cling closer to what remains, and 
transfer our love for those whom we have lost to those who yet 
live. Our circle will be small, but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune. And when time shall have softened 
your despair, new and dear objects of care will be born to replace 
those of whom we have been so cruelly deprived." 

Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the remembrance 
of the threat returned : nor can you wonder, that, omnipotent as 
the fiend had yet been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard 
him as invincible; and that when he had pronounced the words, 
 I shall be ivith you on your wedding- nighty'" I should regard the 
threatened fate as unavoidable. But death was no evil to me, if the 
loss of Elizabeth were balanced with it; and I therefore, with a 
contented and even cheerful countenance, agreed with my father, 
that if my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place in 
ten days, and thus put, as I imagined, the seal to my fate. 

Great God ! if for one instant I had thought of what might be the 
hellish intention of my fiendish adversary, I would rather have 
banished myself for ever from my native country, and wandered a 
friendless outcast over the earth, than have consented to this 
miserable marriage. But, as if possessed of magic powers, the 
monster had blinded me to his real intentions ; and when I thought 
that I prepared only my own death, I hastened that of a far dearer 
victim. 

As the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from 
cowardice or a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink within me. 
But I concealed my feelings by an appearance of hilarity, that 
brought smiles and joy to the countenance of my father, but hardly 
deceived the ever-watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth. She looked 
forward to our union with placid contentment, not unmingled with 
a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now 
appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into 
an airy dream, and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret. 

Preparations were made for the event; congratulatory visits were 
received ; and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as 
I could, in my own heart the anxiety that preyed there, and entered 
with seeming earnestness into the plans of my father, although 
they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. A house 
was purchased for us near Cologny, by which we should enjoy the 
pleasures of the country, and yet be so near Geneva as to see my 
father every day; who would still reside within the walls, for the 
benefit of Ernest, that he might follow his studies at the schools. 



152 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

In the mean time, I took every precaution to defend my person, 
in case the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a 
dagger constantly about me, and was ever on the watch to prevent 
artifice ; and by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity. 
Indeed, as the period approached, the threat appeared more as a 
delusion, not to be regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while 
the happiness I hoped for in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty, as the day fixed for its solemnization drew nearer, 
and I heard it continually spoken of as an occurrence which no 
accident could possibly prevent. 

Elizabeth seemed happy ; my tranquil demeanor contributed 
greatly to calm her mind. But on the day that was to fulfil my 
wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of 
evil pervaded her; and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful 
secret which I had promised to reveal to her the following day. 
My father was in the mean time overjoyed, and, in the bustle of 
preparation, only observed in the melancholy of his niece the 
diffidence of a bride. 

After the ceremony was performed, a large party assembled at 
my father's ; but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should pass the 
afternoon and night at Evian, and return to Cologny the next morning. As the day was fair, and the wind favorable, we resolved to 
go by water. 

Those were the last moments of my life during which I enjoyed 
the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along: the sun was 
hot, but we were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy, while 
we enjoyed the beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the 
lake, where we saw Mont Salve, the pleasant banks of Montalegre, 
and at a distance, surmounting all, the beautiful Mont Blanc, and 
the assemblage of snowy mountains that in vain endeavor to 
emulate her; sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the 
mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that would quit 
its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to the 
invader who should wish to enslave it. 

I took the hand of Elizabeth: ''You are sorrowful, my love. 
Ah ! if you knew what I have suftered, and what I may yet endure, 
you would endeavor to let me taste the quiet, and freedom from 
despair, that this one day at least permits me to enjoy." 

''Be happy, my dear Victor," replied Elizabeth; "there is, I 
hope, nothing to distress you ; and be assured that if a lively joy 
is not painted in my face, my heart is contented. Something 
whispers to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I53 

opened before us; but I will not listen to such a sinister voice. 
Observe how fast we move along, and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise above the dome of Mont Blanc, 
render this scene of beauty still more interesting. Look also at the 
innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we 
can distinguish every pebble that lies at the bottom. What a divine 
day! how happy and serene all nature appears!" 

Thus Elizabeth endeavored to divert her thoughts and mine from 
all reflection upon melancholy subjects. But her temper was fluctuating; joy for a few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually 
gave place to distraction and reverie. 

The sun sunk lower in the heavens ; we passed the river Drance, 
and observed its path through the chasms of the higher, and the 
glens of the lower, hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake, 
and we approached the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its 
eastern boundary. The spire of Evian shone under the woods that 
surrounded it, and the range of mountain above mountain by which 
it was overhung. 

The wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing 
rapidity, sunk at sunset to a light breeze ; the soft air just ruflfled 
the water, and caused a pleasant motion among the trees as we 
approached the shore, from which it wafted the most delightful 
scent of flowers and hay. The sun sunk beneath the horizon as we 
landed; and, as I touched the shore, I felt those cares and fears 
revive, which soon were to clasp me, and cling to me for ever. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

IT was eight o'clock when we landed : we walked for a short time 
on the shore, Enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to 
the inn, and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and 
mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still displaying their black 

outlines. 

The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the 
heavens, and was beginning to descend; the clouds swept across it 
swifter than the flight of the vulture, and dimmed her rays, while 
the lake reflected the scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier 



154 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

by the restless waves that were beginning to rise. Suddenly a 
heavy storm of rain descended. 

I had been calm during the day; but, so soon as night obscured 
the shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind. I was 
anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which 
was hidden in my bosom. Every sound terrified me ; but I resolved 
that I would sell my life dearly, and not relax the impending conflict until my own life, or that of my adversary, was extinguished. 

Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence; at length she said, ''What is it that agitates you, my 
dear Victor? What is it you fear.?" 

" Oh ! peace, peace, my love," replied I ; " this night, and all will 
be safe ; but this night is dreadful, very dreadful." 

I passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly I reflected 
how dreadful the combat which I momentarily expected would be to 
my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to 
join her until I had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of 
my enemy. 

She left me, and I continued some time walking up and down the 
passages of the house, and inspecting every corner that might aflford 
a retreat to my adversary. But I discovered no trace of him, and 
was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of his menaces ; when suddenly I 
heard a shrill and dreadful scream. It came from the room into 
which Elizabeth had retired. As I heard it, the whole truth rushed 
into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and 
fibre was suspended; I could feel the blood trickling in my veins, 
and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. This state lasted but 
for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed into the 
room. 

Great God ! why did I not then expire.? Why am I here to relate 
the destruction of the best hope, and the purest creature of earth? 
She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her 
head hanging down, and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. Everywhere I turn I see the same figure,  her 
bloodless arms and relaxed form flung by the murderer on its bridal 
bier. Could I behold this, and live? (Alas! life is obstinate, and 
clings closest where it is most hated.) For a moment only, and I 
lost recollection : I fainted. 

When I recovered, I found myself surrounded by the people of 
the inn; their countenances expressed a breathless terror: but the 
horror of others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the feel


THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I55 

ings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the room where 
lay the body of Elizabeth, my love, my wife, so lately living, so 
dear, so worthy. She had been moved from the posture in which I 
had first beheld her; and now, as she lay, her head upon her arm, 
and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, I might have 
supposed her asleep. I rushed towards her, and embraced her with 
ardor; but the deathly languor and coldness of the limbs told me, 
that what I now held in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth 
whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous marks of the 
fiend's grasp were on her neck, and the breath had ceased to issue 
from her lips. 

While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened 
to look up. The windows of the room had before been darkened; 
and I felt a kind of panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the 
moon illuminate the chamber. The shutters had been thrown ba,ck; 
and, with a sensation of horror not to be described, I saw at the 
open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was 
on the face of the monster ; he seemed to jeer, as with his fiendish 
finger he pointed towards the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards 
the window, and, drawing a pistol from my bosom, shot; but he 
eluded me, leaped from his station, and, running with the swiftness 
of lightning, plunged into the lake. 

The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I 
pointed to the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the 
track with boats ; nets were cast, but in vain. After passing several 
hours, we returned, hopeless ; most of my companions believing it 
to have been a form conjured by my fancy. After having landed, 
they proceeded to search the country, parties going in different 
directions among the woods and vines. 

I did not accompany them ; I was exhausted : a film covered my 
eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. In this state 
I lay on a bed, hardly conscious of what had happened; my eyes 
wandered round the room, as if to seek something that I had lost. 

At length I remembered that my father would anxiously expect 
the return of Elizabeth and myself, and that I must return alone. 
This reflection brought tears into my eyes, and I wept for a long 
time; but my thoughts rambled to various subjects, reflecting on 
my misfortunes and their cause. I was bewildered in a cloud of 
wonder and horror. The death of William, the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval, and lastly of my wife; even at that 
moment I knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from 
the malignity of the fiend; my father even now might be writhing 



156 ' FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. This idea 
made me shudder, and recalled me to action. I started up, and resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed. 

There were no horses to be procured, and I must return by the 
lake; but the wind was unfavorable, and the rain fell in torrents. 
However, it was hardly morning, and I might reasonably hope to 
arrive by night. I hired men to row, and took an oar myself; for I 
had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt, and the excess of agitation that I endured, rendered me incapable of any exertion. I threw 
down the oar, and, leaning my head upon my hands, gave way to 
every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw the scenes 
which were familiar to me in my happier time, and which I had 
contemplated but the day before in the company of her who was 
now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my 
eyes. The raia had ceased for a moment, and I saw the fish play in 
the waters as they had done a few hours before : they had then been 
observed by Elizabeth. Nothing is so painful to the human mind 
as a great and sudden change. The sun might shine, or the clouds 
might lower; but nothing could appear to me as it had done the 
day before. A fiend had snatched from me every hope of future 
happiness ; no creature had ever been so miserable as I was ; so 
frightful an event was single in the history of man. 

But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last 
overwhelming event. Mine has been a tale of horrors ; I have 
reached their acme and what I must now relate can but be tedious 
to you. Know that, one by one, my friends were snatched awaj; I 
was left desolate. My own strength is exhausted; and I must tell, 
in a few words, what remains of my hideous narration. 

I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived ; but the 
former sunk under the tidings that I bore. I see him now, excellent and venerable old man ! his eyes wandered in vacancy, for they 
had lost their charm and their delight,  his niece, his more than 
daughter, whom he doated on with all that affection which a man 
feels, who, in the decline of life, having few affections, clings 
more earnestly to those that remain. Cursed, cursed be the fiend 
that brought misery on his gray hairs, and doomed him to waste in 
wretchedness! He could not live under the horrors that were accumulated around him : an apoplectic fit was brought on, and in a 
few days he died in my arms. 

What then became of me? I know not; I lost sensation, "and 
chains and darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I57 

Sometimes, indeed, I dreamed that I wandered in flowery meadows 
and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth ; but awoke, and 
found myself in a dungeon. Melancholy followed ; but, by degrees, 
I gained a clear conception of my miseries and situation, and was 
then released from my prison. For they had called me mad ; and, 
during many months, as I understood, a solitary cell had been my 
habitation. 

But liberty had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I awakened 
to reason, at the same time awakened te revenge. As the memory 
of past misfortunes pressed upon me, I began to reflect on their 
cause,  the monster whom I had created, the miserable demon 
whom I had sent abroad into the world for my destruction. I was 
possessed by a maddening rage when I thought of him, and desired 
and ardently prayed that I might have him within my grasp, to 
wreak a great and signal revenge on his cursed head. 

Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes : I began to 
reflect on the best means of securing him ; and, for this purpose, 
about a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in 
the town, and told him that I had an accusation to make ; that I 
knew the destroyer of my family; and that I required him to exert 
his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. 

The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. ''Be 
assured, sir," said he, ''no pins or exertions on my part shall be 
spared to discover the villain." 

"I thank you," replied I; "listen, therefore, to the deposition 
that I have to make. It is indeed a tale so strange, that I should 
fear you would not credit it, were there not something in truth 
which, however wonderful, forces conviction. The story is too 
connected to be mistaken for a dream, and I have no motive for 
falsehood." My manner, as I thus addressed him, was impressive, 
but calm : I had formed in my heart a resolution to pursue my 
destroyer to death ; and this purpose quieted my agony, and providentially reconciled me to life. I now related my history briefly, 
but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with accuracy, 
and never deviating into invective or exclamation. 

The magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous ; but, as I 
continued, he became more attentive and interested : I saw him 
sometimes shud(er with horror; at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his countenance. 

When I had concluded my narration, I said,  " This is the being 
whom I accuse, and for whose detection and punishment I call 
upon you to exert your whole power. It is your duty as a magis


I5S FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

trate, and I believe and hope that your feelings as a man will not 
revolt from the execution of those functions on this occasion." 
This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of 
my auditor. He had heard my story with that half kind of belief 
that is given to a tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when 
he was called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide 
of his incredulity returned. He, however, answered mildly,  'I 
would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit; but the creature of whom 3ou speak appears to have powers which would put 
all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an animal which 
can traverse the sea of ice, and inhabit caves and dens, where no 
man would venture to intrude.' Besides, some months have elapsed 
since the commission of his crimes, and no one can conjecture to 
what place he has wandered, or what region he may now inhabit." 
I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabit; 
and if he has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he may be hunted 
like the chamois, and destroyed as a beast of prey. But I perceive 
your thoughts : you do not credit my narrative, and do not intend 
to pursue my enemy with the punishment which is his desert." 

As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes ; the magistrate was intimidated. " You are mistaken," said he : " I will exert myself; and 
if it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall 
suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from 
what you have yourself described to be his properties, that this will 
prove impracticable, and that, while every proper measure is pursued, you should endeavor to make up your mind to disappointment." 

'That cannot be; but all that I can say will be of little avail. 
My revenge is of no moment to you ; yet, while I allow it to be a 
vice, I confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. 
My rage is unspeakable, when I reflect that the murderer, whom I 
have turned loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just 
demand: I have but one resource; and I devote myself, either in 
my life or death, to his destruction." 

I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this ; there was a 
frenzy in my manner, and something, I doubt not, of that haughty 
fierceness which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed. 

But to a Genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by fai; 

 

other ideas than those of devotion and heroism, this elevation of 
mind had much the appearance of madness. He endeavored to 
soothe me, as a nurse does a child, and reverted to my tale as the 
effects of delirium. . 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. I59 
'Man," I cried, '' how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom I 
Cease ; you know not what it is you say." 

I broke from the house angry and disturbed, and retired to meditate on some other mode of action. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

1\ TY present situation was one in which all voluntary thought 
-- was swallowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury : 
revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure ; it modelled my feelings, and allowed me to be calculating and calm, at 
periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been my 
portion. 

My first resolution was to quit Geneva for ever; my country, 
which, when I was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my 
adversity, became hateful. I provided myself with a sum of money, 
together with a few jewels which had belonged to my mother, and 
departed. 

And now my wanderings began, which are to cease but with life. 
I have traversed a vast portion of the earth, and have endured all 
the hardships which travellers, in deserts and barbarous countries, 
are wont to meet. How I have lived I hard know; many times 
have I stretched my failing limbs upon the sandy plain, and prayed 
for death. But revenge kept me alive; I dared not die, and leave 
my adversary in being. 

When I quitted Geneva, my first labor was to gain some clew by 
which I might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. But my plan 
was unsettled; and I wandered many hours around the confines 
of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue. As night approached, I found myself at the entrance of the cemetery where 
William, Elizabeth, and my father reposed. I entered it, and 
approached the tomb which marked their graves. Every thing was 
silent, except 4:he leaves of the trees, which were gently agitated 
by the wind; the night was nearly dark; and the scene would have . 
been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested observer. The 
spirits of the departed seemed to flit around, and to cast a shadow, 
which was felt, but seen not, around the head of the mourner. 

The deep grief which this scene had at first excited, quickly gave 



l6o FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

way to rage and despair. Thej were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy him I must drag out my weary 
existence. I knelt on the grass, and kissed the earth, and, with 
quivering lips, exclaimed,  '' By the sacred earth on which I kneel, 
by the shades that wander near me, by the deep and eternal grief 
that I feel, I swear; and by thee, O Night, and by the spirits that 
preside over thee, I swear to pursue the demon who caused this 
misery, until he or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life : to execute this dear revenge, will I 
again behold the sun, and tread the green herbage of the earth, 
which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for ever. And I call 
on you, spirits of the dead ; and on jou, wandering ministers of 
vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my work. Let the cursed and 
hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that 
now torments me." 

I had begun my adjuration with solemnity, and an awe which 
almost assured me that the shades of my murdered friends heard 
and approved my devotion ; but the furies possessed me as I concluded, and rage choked my utterance. 

I was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish laugh. It rung on my ears long and heavily; the mountains 
re-echoed it, and I felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery 
and laughter. Surely, in that moment I should have been possessed 
by frenzy, and have destroyed my miserable existence, but that my 
vow was heard, and that I was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away; when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently 
close to my ear, addressed me in an audible whisper,  "I am satisfied : miserable wretch ! you have determined to live, and I am 
satisfied." 

I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded ; but 
the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon 
arose, and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape, as he 
fled with more than mortal speed. 

I pursued him; and for many months this has been my task. 
Guided by a slight clew, I followed the windings of the Rhone, but 
vainly. The blue Mediterranean appeared ; and, by a strange 
chante, I saw the fiend enter by night, and hide himself in a vessel 
bound for the Black Sea. I took my passage in the same ship ; but 
he escaped, I know not how. 

Amid the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded 
me, I have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the peasants, 
scared by this horrid apparition, informed me of his path ; some


THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. l6l 

times he himself, who feared that if I lost trace I should despair and 
die, often left some mark to guide me. The snows descended on my 
head, and I saw the print of his huge step on the white plain. To 
you, first entering on life, to whom care is new, and agony unknown, how can you understand what I have felt, and still feel. 
Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was destined 
to endure ; I was cursed by some devil, and carried about with me 
my eternal hell ; yet still a spirit of good followed and directed my 
steps, and, when I most murmured, would suddenly extricate me 
from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sunk under the exhaustion, a repast was 
prepared for me in the desert, that restored and inspirited me. The 
fare was indeed coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate ; 
but I may not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that I had 
invoked to aid me. Often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, 
and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, 
shed the few drops that revived me, and vanish, 

I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers ; but the demon 
generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the 
country chiefly collected. In other places human beings were seldom seen ; and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that 
crossed my path. I had money with me, and gained the friendship 
of the villagers by distributing it, or bringing with me some food 
that I had killed, which, after taking a small part, I always presented to those who had provided me with fire and utensils for 
cooking. 

My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was 
during sleep alone that I could taste joy. O blessed sleep ! often, 
when most miserable, I sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me 
even to rapture. The spirits that guarded me had provided these 
moments, or rather hours, of happiness, that I might retain strength 
to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have 
sunk under my hardships. During the day, I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of night : for in sleep I saw my friends, my 
wife, and my beloved country; again I saw the benevolent countenance of. my father, heard the silver tones of my Elizabeth's voice, 
and beheld Clerval enjoying health and youth. Often, when wearied by a toilsome march, I persuaded myself that I was dreaming 
until night should come, and that I should then enjoy reality in the 
arms of my dearest friends. What agonizing fondness did I feel for 
them! How did I cling to their dear forms, as sometimes they 
haunted even my waking hours, and persuade myself that they still 

II 



l62 



FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 



lived ! At such moments, vengeance, that burned within me, died 
in my heart, and I pursued my path towards the destruction of the 
demon, more as a task enjoined by Heaven, as the mechanical impulse of some power of which I was unconscious, than as the ardent 
desire of my soul. 

What his feelings were whom I pursued, I cannot know. Sometimes, indeed, he left marks in writing on the barks of the trees, or 
cut in the stone, that guided me, or instigated my fury. '' My reign 
is not yet over" (these words were legible in one of these inscriptions) : ''you live, and my power is complete. Follow me; I seek 
the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of 
cold and frost, to which I am impassive. You will find near this 
place, if 3ou follow not too tardily, a dead hare ; eat, and be refreshed. Come on, my enemy ; we have yet to wrestle for our lives ; 
but many hard and miserable hours must you endure, until that 
period shall arrive." 

Scoffing devil ! again do I vow vengeance ; again do I devote 
thee, miserable fiend, to torture and death. Never will I omit my 
search, until he or I perish ; and then with what ecstasy shall I join 
my Elizabeth, and those who even now prepare for me the reward 
of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage ! 

As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened, and the cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support. The peasants were shut up in their hovels, and only a few of 
the most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals which starvation 
had forced from their hiding-places to seek for prey. The rivers 
were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured ; and thus I 
was cut off from my chief article of maintenance. 

The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my 
labors. One inscription that he left was in these words : " Prepare ! 
your toils only begin : wrap yourself in furs, and provide food, for 
we shall soon enter upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred." 

My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing 
words ; I resolved not to fail in my purpose ; and, calling on heaven 
to support me, I continued with unabated fervor to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance, and formed 
the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh, how unlike it was to the 
blue seas of the south ! Covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by its superior wildness and ruggedness. The 
Greeks wept for joy when they beheld the Mediterranean from the 
hills of Asia, and hailed with rapture the boundary of their toils. 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 163 

I did not weep; but I knelt down, and, with a full heart, thanked 
my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where I 
hoped, notwithstanding my adversary's gibe, to meet and grapple 
with him. 

Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and dogs, 
and thus traversed the snows with inconceivable speed. I know 
not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages; but I found 
that, as before I had daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained 
on him ; so much so, that when I first saw the ocean, he was but 
one day's journey in advance, and I hoped to intercept him before 
he should reach the beach. With new courage, therefore, I pressed 
on, and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. 
I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend, and gained 
accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived 
the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols ; putting to 
flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage, through fear of his terrible appearance. He carried off their store of winter food, and 
placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a numerous 
drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same night, 
to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his journey 
across the sea in a direction that led to no land ; and they conjectured that he must speedily be destroyed by the breaking ice, or 
frozen by the eternal frosts. 

On hearing this information, I suffered a temporary access of 
despair. He had escaped me; and I must commence a destructive 
and almost endless journey across the mountainous ices of the 
ocean  amid cold that few of the inhabitants could long endure, 
and which I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not 
hope to survive. Yet, at the idea that the fiend should live and be 
triumphant, my rage and vengeance returned, and, like a mighty 
tide, overwhelmed every other feeling. After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered round, and instigated me 
to toil and revenge, I prepared for my journey. 

I exchanged my land sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities 
of the frozen ocean ; and, purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, 
I departed from the land. 

I cannot guess how many days have passed since then; but I 
have endured misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a 
just retribution, burning within my heart, could have enabled me to 
support. Immense and rugged mountains of ice often barred up 
my passage, and I often heard the thunder of the ground sea, which 
threatened my destruction. But again the frost came, and made 
the paths of the sea secure. 



164 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

By the quantity of provision which I had consumed, I should 
guess that I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the heart, often 
wrung bitter drops of despondency and grief from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost secured her prey, and I should soon have 
sunk beneath this misery; when once, after the poor animals that 
carried me had with incredible toil gained the summit of a sloping 
ice mountain, and one sinking under his fatigue died, I viewed the 
expanse before me with anguish, and suddenly my eye caught a 
dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover 
what it could be, and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I distinguished a sledge, and the distorted proportions of a well-known 
form within. Oh, with what a burning gush did hope revisit my 
heart! warm tears filled my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that 
they might not intercept the view I had of the demon ; but still my 
sight was dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the 
emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. 

But this was not the time for delay; I disencumbered the dogs of 
their dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food ; and, 
after an hour's rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which 
was bitterly irksome to me, I continued my route. The sledge was 
still visible ; nor did I again lose sight of it, except at the moments 
when for a short time some ice rock concealed it with its intervening crags. I indeed perceptibly gained on it; and when, after 
nearly two days' journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than a mile 
distant, my heart bounded within me. 

But now", when I appeared almost within grasp of my enemy, my 
hopes were suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace of him more 
utterly than I had ever done before. A ground sea was heard; the 
thunder of its progress, as the waters rolled and swelled beneath 
me every moment more ominous and terrific. I pressed on, but in 
vain. The wind arose ; the sea roared ; and, as with the mighty 
shock of an earthquake, it split, and cracked with a tremendous 
and overwhelming sound. The work was soon finished : in a few 
minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my enemy, and I 
was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice, that was continually 
lessening, and thus preparing for me a hideous death. 

In this manner many appalling hours passed ; several of my dogs 
died; and I myself was about to sink under the accumulation of 
distress, when I saw your vessel riding at anchor, and holding forth 
to me hopes of succor and life. I had no conception that vessels 
ever came so far north, and was astounded at the sight. I quickly 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 165 

destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars; and by these means 
was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice-raft in the direction of your ship. I had determined, if you were going southward, 
still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas, rather than abandon 
my purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with which 
I could still pursue my enemy. But your direction was northward. 
You took me on board when my vigor was exhausted, and I should 
soon have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death, which 
I still dread  for my task is unfulfilled. 

Oh ! when will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the demon, 
allow me the rest I so much desire; or must I die, and he yet live.' 
If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall not escape ; that you 
will seek him, and satisfy my vei1%eance in his death. Yet, do I 
dare ask you to undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships 
that I have undergone? No; I am not so selfish. Yet, when I am 
dead, if he should appear; if the ministers of vengeance should 
conduct him to you, swear that he shall not live,  swear that he 
shall not triumph over my accumulated woes and live to make 
another such a wretch as I am. He is eloquent and persuasive ; 
and once his words had even power over my heart; but trust him 
not. His soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery and fiendlike malice. Hear him not; call on the names of William, Justine, 
Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched Victor, and thrust 
your sword into his heart. I will hover near, and direct the steel 
aright. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

WALTON, IN CONTINUATION. 

August 26th, 1 7  . 

YOU have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret; and do 
you not feel your blood congealed with horror, like that which 
even now curdles mine. Sometimes, seized with sudden agony, he 
could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with agony. His 
fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now 
subdued to downcast sorrow, and quenched in infinite wretchedness. 
Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones, and related 
the most horrible incidents with a tranquil voice, suppressing every 



l66 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

mark of agitation ; then, like a volcano bursting forth, his face 
would suddenly change to an expression of the wildest rage, as he 
shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor. 

His tale is connected, and told with an appearance of the simplest 
truth ; yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and Safie, which 
he showed me, and the apparition of the monster, seen from our ship, 
brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative 
than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a 
monster has then really existed; I cannot doubt it; yet I am lost in 
surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavored to gain from 
Frankenstein the particulars of his creature's formation ; but on this 
point he was impenetrable. 

'Are you mad, my friend .p said he, 'or whither does your 
senseless curiosity lead you. Would you also create for yourself 
and the world a demoniacal enemy? Or to what do your questions 
tend? Peace, peace! learn my miseries, and do not seek to increase 
your own." 

Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his history : he asked to see them, and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places ; but principally in giving life and 
spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy. '' Since you 
have preserved my narration," said he,  I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity." 

Thus has a week passed awaj, while I have listened to the strangest tale that ever imagination formed. My thoughts, and every 
feeling of my soul, have been drunk up by the interest for my guest, 
which this tale and his own elevated and gentle manners have created. I wish to soothe him ; yet can I counsel one so infinitely 
miserable, so destitute of every hope of consolation, to live? Oh, 
no ! the only joy that he can now know will be when he composes 
his shattered feelings to peace and death. Yet he enjojs one comfort, the offspring of solitude and delirium : he believes, that, when 
in dreams he holds converse with his friends, and derives from that 
communion consolation for his miseries, or excitements to his 
vengeance, they are not the creations of his fancy, but the real 
beings, who visit him from the regions of a remote world. This 
faith gives a solemnity to his reveries that renders them to me 
almost as imposing and interesting as truth.  

Our conversations are not always confined to his own historj'- and 
misfortunes. On every point of general literature he displays unbounded knowledge, and a quick and piercing apprehension. His 
eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can I hear him, when he 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 167 

relates a pathetic incident, or endeavors to move the passions of 
pity or love, without tears. What a glorious creature mxist he have 
been in the days of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin ! He seems to feel his own worth and the greatness of 
his fall. 
 When younger," said he, ''I felt as if I were destined for some 
great enterprise. My feelings are profound ; but I possessed a coolness of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements. This 
sentiment of the worth of my nature supported me, when others 
would have been oppressed ; for I deemed it criminal to throw away 
in useless grief those talents that might be useful to my fellowcreatures. When I reflected on the work I had completed, no less a 
one than the creation of a sensitive, rational animal, I could not 
rank myself with the herd of common projectors. But this feeling, 
which supported me in the commencement of my career, now serves 
only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and 
hopes are as nothing; and, like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was 
vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by 
the union of these qualities I conceived the idea, and executed the 
creation, of a man. Even now I cannot recollect, without passion, 
my reveries while the work was incomplete. I trod heaven in my 
thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea 
of their effects. From my infancy I was imbued with high hopes 
and a lofty ambition ; but how am I sunk ! 

 O my friend! if you had known me as I once was, you would 
not recognize me in this state of degradation. Despondency rarely 
visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell, 
never, never again to rise." 

Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend ; 
I have sought one who would sympathize with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one ; but I fear I have 
gained him only to know his value and lose him. I would reconcile 
him to life, but he repulses the idea. 

" I thank you, Walton," he said, " for your kind attentions towards 
so miserable a wretch ; but, when you speak of new ties and fresh 
affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone.? 
Can a#y man be to me as Clerval was; or any woman another 
Elizabeth.? Even where the affections are not strongly moved by 
any superior excellence, the companions of our childhood always 
possess a certain power over our minds, which hardly any later 
friend can obtain. They know our infantine dispositions, which, 



1 68 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

however they may be afterwards modified, are never eradicated ; and 
they can judge of our actions with more certain conclusions as to 
the integrity of our motives. A sister or a brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early, suspect the 
other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend, however strongly 
he may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be invaded with suspicion. But I enjoyed friends, dear, not only through habit and 
association, but from their own merits ; and, wherever I am, the 
soothing voice of my Elizabeth, and the conversation of Clerval, 
will be ever whispered in my ear. They are dead ; and but one feeling in such a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life. If I 
were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my fellow-creatures, then could I live to fulfil it. 
But such is not my destiny; I must pursue and destroy the being to 
whom I gave existence ; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled, and I 
may die." 

September 2d. 

My beloved Sister,  I write to you encompassed by peril, and 
ignorant whether I am ever doomed to see again dear England, and 
the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am surrounded by mountains 
of ice, which admit of no escape, and threaten every moment to 
crush my vessel. The brave fellows, whom I have persuaded to be 
my companions, look towards me for aid ; but I have none to bestow. 
There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. We may survive ; and, if we do 
not, I will repeat the lessons of my Seneca, and die with a good 
heart. 

Yet, what, Margaret, will be the state of your mind? You will 
not hear of my destruction, and you will anxiously wait my return. 
Years will pass, and you will have visitings of despair, and yet be 
tortured by hope. O my beloved sister! the sickening failings of 
your heart-felt expectations are, in prospect, more terrible to me 
than my own death. But you have a husband, and lovely children; 
you may be happy : Heaven bless you, and make you so ! 

My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. 
He endeavors to fill me with hope ; and talks as if life were a possession which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened to other navigators, who have attempted this 
sea, and, in spite of myself, he fills me with cheerful auguries. 
Even the sailofs feel the power of his eloquence : when he speaks, 
they no longer despair; he rouses their energies, and, while they 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 1 69 

hear his voice, they believe these vast mountains of ice are molehills, which will vanish before the resolution of man. These feelings are transitory; each day's expectation delayed fills them with 
fear, and I almost dread a mutiny caused by this despair. 

September 5th. 

A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest, that, although 
it is highly probable that these papers rpay never reach you, yet I 
cannot forbear recording it. 

We are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent 
danger of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is excessive, 
and many of my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave 
amid this scene of desolation. Frankenstein has daily declined in 
health : a feverish fire still glimmers in his eyes ; but he is exhausted, and, when suddenly roused to any exertion, he speedily 
sinks again into apparent lifelessness. 

I mentioned in my last letter the fears I entertained of a mutiny. 
This morning, as I sat watching the wan countenance of my friend, 
 his eyes half closed, and his limbs hanging listlessly,  I was 
roused by half a dozen of the sailors, who desired admission into 
the cabin. They entered ; and their leader addressed me. He told 
me that he and his companions had been chosen by the other sailors 
to come in deputation to me, to make me a demand, which, in justice, I could not refuse. We were immured in ice, and should 
probably never escape ; but they feared that if, as was possible, the 
ice should dissipate, and a free passage be opened, I should be rash 
enough to continue my voyage, and lead them into fresh dangers, 
after they might happily have surmounted this. 

They desired, therefore, that I should engage with a solemn 
promise, that if the vessel should be freed, I would instantly direct 
my course southward. 

This speech troubled me. I had not despaired ; nor had I yet 
conceived the idea of returning, if set free. Yet could I, in justice, 
or even in possibility, refuse this demand.' I hesitated before I 
answered; when Frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and, 
indeed, appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused 
himself; his eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed with momentary 
vigor. Turning towards the men, he said,  

"What do you mean? What do you demand of your captain.? 
Are you then so easily turned from your design? Did you not call 
this a glorious expedition? and wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way was smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because 



I 70 FRANKENSTEIN ; OR, 

it was full of dangers and terror; because, at every new incident, 
your fortitude was to be called forth, and your courage exhibited; 
because danger and death surrounded, and these dangers you were 
to brave and overcome. For this was it a glorious, for this was it 
an honorable, undertaking. You were hereafter to be hailed as the 
benefactors of your species; your names adored, as belonging to 
brave men who encountered death for the honor and benefit of mankind. And now, behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, 
if you will, the first mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you 
shrink away, and are content to be handed down as men who had 
not strength enough to endure cold and peril; and so, poor souls, 
they were chilly, and returned to their warm firesides. Why, that 
requires not this preparation ; ye need not have come thus far, and 
dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat, merely to prove 
yourselves cowards. Oh! be men, or be more than men. Be 
steady to your purpose, and firm as a rock. This ice is not made 
of such stuff as your hearts might be ; it is mutable, cannot withstand you, if you say that it shall not. Do not return to your 
families with the stigma of disgrace marked on your brows. Return as heroes who have fought and conquered, and who know not 
what it is to turn their backs on the foe." 

He spoke this with a voice so modulated to the different feelings 
expressed in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and 
heroism, that can you wonder that these men were moved . They 
looked at one another, and were unable to reply. I spoke; I told 
them to retire, and consider of what had been said: that I would 
not lead them further north, if they strenuously desired the contrary; but that I hoped that, with reflection, their courage would 
return. 

They retired, and I turned towards my friend ; but he was sunk 
in languor, and almost deprived of life. 

How all this will terminate, I know not ; but I had rather die, 
than return shamefully,  my purpose unfulfilled. Yet I fear such 
will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and 
honor, can never willingly continue to endure their present hardships. 

September 7th. 
The die is cast; I have consented to return, if we are not destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; 
I come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess, to bear this injustice with patience. 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 4 ll 

September 12th. 
It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my hopes of 
utility and glory; I have lost my friend. But I w\\\ endeavor to 
detail these bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and, while 
I am wafted towards England, and towards you, I will not despond. 
September loth, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder 
were heard at a distance, as the islands split and cracked in every 
direction. We were in the most imminent peril ; but, as we could 
only remain passive, my chief attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest, whose illness increased in such a degree that he 
was entirely confined to his bed. The ice cracked behind us, and 
was driven with force towards the north ; a breeze sprung from the 
west, and on the nth the passage towards the south became perfectly free. When the sailors saw this, and that their return to 
their native country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous 
joy broke from them, loud and long-continued. Frankenstein, 
who was dozing, awoke, and asked the cause of the tumult. '' They 
shout," I said, "because they will soon return to England." 
''Do you then really return." 

''Alas! yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead 
them unwillingly to danger, and I must return." 

"Do so, if you will; but I will not. You may give up your purpose ; but mine is assigned to me by Heaven, and I dare not. I am 
weak; but surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow 
me with sufficient strength." Saying this, he endeavored to spring 
from the bed, but the exertion was too great for him ; he fell back, 
and fainted. 

It was long before he was restored; and I often thought that life 
was entirely extinct. At length he opened his eyes, but he breathed 
with difficulty, and was unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a 
composing draught, and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. In 
the mean time, he told me that my friend had certainly not many 
hours to live. 

His sentence was pronounced; and I could only grieve, and be 
patient. I sat by his bed watching him ; his eyes were closed, and 
I thought he slept; but presently he called to me in a feeble voice, 
and, bidding me come near, said,  " Alas ! the strength I relied on 
is gone; I feel that I shall soon die, and he, my enemj and persecutor, may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the last 
moments of my existence I feel that burning hatred, and ardent 
desire of revenge, I once expressed; but I feel myself justified in 
desiring the death of my adversary. During these last days I have 



172 Frankenstein; or, 

been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do I find it 
blamable. In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created a rational 
creature, and was bound towards him, to assure, as far as was in 
mj power, his happiness and well-being. This was my duty; but 
there was still another, paramount to that. My duties towards my 
fellow-creatures had greater claims to my attention, because they 
included a greater proportion of happiness or misery. Urged by 
this view, I refused, and I did right in refusing to create a companion for the first creature. He showed unparalleled malignity and 
selfishness in evil : he destroyed my friends ; he devoted to destruction beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and 
wisdom ; nor do I know where this thirst for vengeance may end. 
Miserable himself, that he may render no other wretched he ought 
to die. The task of his destruction was mine, but I have failed. 
When actuated by selfish and vicious motives, I asked you to undertake my unfinished work; and I renew this request now, when I am 
only induced by reason and virtue. 

''Yet I cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends, to 
fulfil this task; and now, that you are returning to England, you 
will have little chance of meeting with him. But the consideration 
of these points, and the well-balancing of what you may esteem 
your duties, I leave to you ; my judgment and ideas are already 
disturbed by the near approach of death. I dare not ask you to do 
what I think right, for I may still be misled by passion. 

''That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs 
me ; in other respects, this hour, when I momentarily expect my release, is the only happy one which I have enjoyed for several years. 
The forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and I hasten to their 
arms. Farewell, Walton ! Seek happiness in tranquillity, and 
avoid ambition, even if it be only the apparently innocent one of 
distinguishing yourself in science and discoveries. Yet why do I 
say this .' I have myself been blasted in these hopes, yet another 
may succeed." 

His voice became fainter as he spoke ; and, at length, exhausted 
by his efort, he sunk into silence. About half an hour afterwards, 
he attempted again to speak, but was unable ; he pressed my hand 
feebly, and his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle 
smile passed away from his lips. 

Margaret, what comment can I make on the untimely extinction 
of this glorious spirit? What can I say, that will enable you to understand the depth of my sorrow.? All that I should express would 
be inadequate and feeble. My tears flow; my mind is overshad


THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 1 73 

J owed by a cloud of disappointment. But I journey towards England, and I may there find consolation. 

I am interrupted. What do those sounds portend? It is midnight ; the breeze blows fairly, and the watch on the deck scarcely 
stir. Again : there is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it 
comes from the cabin where the remains of Frankenstein still lie. 
I must arise, and examine. Good-night, my sister. 

Great God ! what a scene has just taken place ! I am yet dizzy 
with the remembrance of it. I hardly know whether I shall have 
the power to detail it ; yet the talc which I have recorded would be 
incomplete without this final and wonderful catastrophe. 

I entered the cabin, where lay the remains of my ill-fated and 
admirable friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot find 
words to describe ; gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in 
its preparations. As he hung over the coffin, his face was concealed 
by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in 
color and apparent texture like that of a mummy. When he heard 
the sound of my approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief 
and horror, and sprung towards the window. Never did I behold a 
vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily, and endeavored to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer. I called on 
him to stay. 

He paused, looking on me with wonder; and, again turning 
towards the lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget my 
presence, and every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the 
wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion. 

"That is also my victim," he exclaimed; "in his murder my 
crimes are consummated ; the miserable series of my being is 
wound to its close ! O Frankenstein ! generous and self-devoted 
being ! what does it avail that I now ask thee to pardon me ? I, who 
irretrievably destroyed thee by destroying all thou lovedst. Alas ! 
he is cold ; he may not answer me." 

His voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses, which had 
suggested to me the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend, 
in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I approached this tremendous being: I 
dared not again raise my looks to his face, there was something so 
scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. I attempted to speak, but 
the words died on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild 
and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I gathered resolution to 
address him, in a pause of the tempest of his passion: "Your re


1 74 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

pentance," I said, ' is now superfluous. If you had listened to the 
voice of conscience, and heeded the stings of remqrse, before you 
had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein 
would 3et have lived." 
' And do you dream," said the demon, do you think that I was 
then dead to agony and remorse? He," he continued, pointing to 
the corpse, 'he suffered not more in the consummation of the deed; 
oh ! not the ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine 
during the lingering detail of its execution. A frightful selfishness 
hurried me on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse. Think 
ye that the groans of Clerval were music to my ears. My heart 
was fashioned to be susceptible of love and sympathy; and, when 
wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without torture, such as you cannot even 
imagine. 

"After the murder of Clerval, I returned to Switzerland, heartbroken and overcome. I pitied Frankenstein ; my pity amounted 
to horror : I abhorred myself. But when I discovered that he, the 
author at once of my existence and of its unspeakable torments, 
dared to hope for happiness ; that while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me, he sought his own enjoyment in feelings 
and passions from the indulgence of which I was for ever barred, 
then omnipotent envy and bitter indignation filled me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance. I recollected my threat, and resolved 
that it should be accomplished. I knew that I was preparing for 
mjself a deadly torture ; but I was the slave, not the master, of an 
impulse which I detested, yet could not disobey. Yet when she 
died I  nay, then I was not miserable. I had cast oft" all feeling, 
subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my despair. Evil 
thenceforth became my good. Urged thus far, I had no choice but 
to adapt my nature to an element which I had willingly chosen. 
The completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is ended : there is my last victim ! " 

I was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet when 
I called to mind what Frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion, and when I again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my friend, indignation was rekindled within me. 
''Wretch!" I said, ''it is well that you come here to whine over 
the desolation that you have made. You throw a torch into a pile 
of buildings, and when they are consumed you sit among the ruins, 
and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend ! if he whom you mourn 
stiU lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. ' 15 

prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not pity that you feel ; you 
lament only because the victim of your rnalignity is withdrawn 
from your power." 

' Oh, it is not thus,  not thus," interrupted the being; ''yet 
such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to be 
the purport of my actions. Yet I seek not a fellow-feeling in my 
misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it 
was the love of virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with 
which my whole being overflowed, that I wished to be participated. 
But now, that virtue has become to me a shadow, and that happiness and aflfection are turned into bitter and loathing despair, in 
what should I seek for sympathy? I am content to sufi'er alone, 
while my sufferings shall endure ; when I die, I am well satisfied 
that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory. Once 
my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. Once I falsely hoped to meet with beings, who, pardoning 
my outward form, would love me for the excellent qualities which I 
was capable of bringing forth. I was nourished with high thoughts 
of honor and devotion. But now vice has degraded me beneath the 
meanest animal. No crime, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, 
can be found comparable to mine. When I call over the frightful 
catalogue of my deeds, I cannot believe that I am he whose thoughts 
were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty 
and the majesty of goodness. But it is even so ; the fallen angel 
becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemy of God and man 
had friends and associates in his desolation : I am quite alone. 

''You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have a knowledge of my crimes and his misfortunes. But in the detail which he 
gave you of them, he could not sum up the hours and months of 
misery which I endured, wasting in impotent passions. For, while 
I destroyed his hopes, I did not satisfy my own desires. They were 
for ever ardent and craving ; still I desired love and fellowship, and I 
was still spurned. Was there no injustice in this ? Am I to be thought 
the only criminal, when all human kind sinned against me? Why 
do you not execrate the rustic who sought to destroy the saviour of 
his child? Nay, these are virtuous and immaculate beings; I, the 
miserable and the abandoned, am an abortion, to be spurned at, 
and kicked, and trampled on. Even now my blood boils at the 
recollection of this injustice. 

"But it is true that I am a wretch. I have murdered the lovely 
and the helpless ; I have strangled the innocent as they slept, and 
grasped to death his throat who never injured me or any other liv


16 FRANKENSTEIN; OR, 

ing thing. I have devoted my creator, the select specimen of all 
that is worthy of love and admiration among men, to misery; 1 
have pursued him even to that irremediable ruin. There he lies, 
white and cold in death. You hate me ; but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I regard myself. I look on the hands 
which executed the deed ; I think on the heart in which the imagmation of it was conceived, and long for the moment when they will 
meet my eyes, when it will haunt my thoughts, no more. 

" Fear not that I shall be the instrument of future mischief. My 
work is nearly complete. Neither jours nor any man's death is needed 
to consummate the series of my being, and to accomplish that which 
must be done; but it requires my own. Do not think that I shall 
be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the iceraft which brought me hither, and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; I shall collect my funeral pile, and consume 
to ashes this miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light 
to any curious and unhallowed wretch, who would create such 
another as I have been. I shall die. I shall no longer feel the 
agonies that consume me, or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet 
unquenched. He is dead who called me into being; and when I 
shall be no more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily 
vanish. I shall no longer see the sun or stars, or feel the winds 
play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, and sense will pass away; and 
in this condition must I find my happiness. Some years ago, when 
the images which this world affords first opened upon me, when I 
felt the cheering warmth of summer, and heard the rustling of the 
leaves and the chirping of the birds, and these were all to me, I 
should have wept to die ; now it is my only consolation. Polluted 
by bitter crimes, and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find 
rest but in death . 

'' Farewell ! I leave you, and in you the last of human kind these 
eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet 
alive, and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be 
better satiated in my life than in my destruction. But it was not 
so ; thou didst seek my extinction, that I might not cause greater 
wretchedness ; and if yet, in some mode unknown to me thou hast 
not yet ceased to think and feel, thou desirest not my life for my 
own misery. Blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to 
thine; for the bitter stings of remorse may not cease to rankle in 
my wounds until death shall close them for ever. 

''But soon," he cried, with sad and solemn enthusiasm, ''I shall 
die, and what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these burning 



THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 1 77 

miseries will Ije extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly, and exult in the agony of the torturing flames. The light 
of that confla'ration will fade away ; my ashes will be swept into 
the sea by the winds. My spirit will sleep in peace ; or, if it thinks, 
it will not surely think thus. Farewell." 

He sprung from the cabin-window, as he said this, upon the iceraft which lay close to the vessel. He was soon borne away by the 
waves, and lost in darkness and distance. 



THE END.



A PRINCESS OF MARS

CHAPTER I 

ON THE ARIZONA HILLS 

I AM a very old man ; how old I do not know. 
Possibly I am a hundred, possibly more; but 
I cannot tell because I have never aged as other 
men, nor do I remember any childhood. So far 
as I can recollect I have always been a man, a 
man of about thirty. I appear today as I did 
forty years and more ago, and yet I feel that I 
cannot go on living forever; that some day I shall 
die the real death from which there is no resurrec 
tion. I do not know why I should fear death, 
I who have died twice and am still alive ; but yet 
I have the same horror of it as you who have 
never died, and it is because of this terror of death, 
I believe, that I am so convinced of my mortality. 
And because of this conviction I have determined 
to write down the story of the interesting periods 
of my life and of my death. I cannot explain the 
phenomena ; I can only set down here in the words 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



of an ordinary soldier of fortune a chronicle of the 
strange events that befell me during the ten years 
that my dead body lay undiscovered in an Arizona 
cave. 

I have never told this story, nor shall mortal 
man see this manuscript until after I have passed 
over for eternity. I know that the average human 
mind will not believe what it cannot grasp, and so 
I do not purpose being pilloried by the public, the 
pulpit, and the press, and held up as a colossal 
liar when I am but telling the simple truths which 
some day science will substantiate. Possibly the 
suggestions which I gained upon Mars, and th" 
knowledge which I can set down in this chronicle 
will aid in an earlier understanding of the mysteries 
of our sister planet; mysteries to you, but no 
longer mysteries to me. 

My name is John Carter; I am better known 
as Captain Jack Carter of Virginia. At the close 
of the Civil War I found myself \ assessed of 
several hundred thousand dollars (Confederate) 
and a captain's commission in the cavalry arm of 
an army which no longer existed ; the servant of a 
state which had vanished with the hopes of the 
South. Masterless, penniless, and with my only 
of livelihood, fighting, gone, I determined 



ON THE ARIZONA HILLS 

to work my way to the southwest and attempt to 
retrieve my fallen fortunes in a search for gold. 

I spent nearly a year prospecting in company 
with another Confederate officer, Captain James 
K. Powell of Richmond. We were extremely 
fortunate, for late in the winter of 1865, after 
many hardships and privations, we located the 
most remarkable gold-bearing quartz vein that 
our wildest dreams had ever pictured. Powell, 
who was a mining engineer by education, stated 
that we had uncovered over a million dollars worth 

of ore in a trifle over three months. 
. 

As our equipment was crude in the extreme we 
' 

decided that one of us must return to civilization, 
purchase the necessary machinery and return with 
a sufficient force of men properly to work the 
mine. 

As Powell was familiar with the country, as well 
as with the mechanical requirements of mining we 
determined that it would be best for him to make 
the trip. It was agreed that I was to hold down 
our claim against the remote possibility of its being 
jumped by some wandering prospector. 

On March 3, 1866, Powell and I packed his 
provisions on two of our burros, and bidding me 
good-bye he mounted his horse, and started down 

[3] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



the mountainside toward the valley, across which 
led the first stage of his journey. 

The morning of Powell's departure was, like 
nearly all Arizona mornings, clear and beautiful; 
I could see him and his little pack animals picking 
their way down the mountainside toward the 
valley, and all during the morning I would catch 
occasional glimpses of them as they topped a hog 
back or came out upon a level plateau. My last 
sight of Powell was about three in the afternoon 
as he entered the shadows of the range on the 
opposite side of the valley. 

Some half hour later I happened to glance 
casually across the valley and was much surprised 
to note three little dots in about the same place I 
had last seen my friend and his two pack animals. 
I am not given to needless worrying, but the more 
I tried to convince myself that all was well with 
Powell, and that the dots I had seen on his trail 
were antelope or wild horses, the less I was able 
to assure myself. 

Since we had entered the territory we had not 
seen a hostile Indian, and we had, therefore, 
become careless in the extreme, and were wont to 
ridicule the stories we had heard of the great 
numbers of these vicious marauders that were sup
[4] 



ON THE ARIZONA HILLS 

posed to haunt the trails, taking their toll in lives 
and torture of every white party which fell into 
their merciless clutches. 

Powell, I knew, was well armed and, further, 
an experienced Indian fighter; but I too had lived 
and fought for years among the Sioux in the 
North, and I knew that his chances were small 
against a party of cunning trailing Apaches. 
Finally I could endure the suspense no longer, and, 
arming myself with my two Colt revolvers and a 
carbine, I strapped two belts of cartridges about 
me and catching my saddle horse, started down the 
trail taken by Powell in the morning. 

As soon as I reached comparatively level ground 
I urged my mount into a canter and continued this, 
where the going permitted, until, close upon dusk, 
I discovered the point where other tracks joined 
those of Powell. They were the tracks of unshod 
ponies, three of them, and the ponies had been 
galloping. 

I followed rapidly until, darkness shutting down, 
I was forced to await the rising of the moon, and 
given an opportunity to speculate on the question 
of the wisdom of my chase. Possibly I had con 
jured up impossible dangers, like some nervous 
old housewife, and when I should catch up with 

m 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



Powell would get a good laugh for my pains. 
However, I am not prone to sensitiveness, and 
the following of a sense of duty, wherever it may 
lead, has always been a kind of fetich with me 
throughout my life; which may account for the 
honors bestowed upon me by three republics and 
the decorations and friendships of an old and 
powerful emperor and several lesser kings, in 
whose service my sword has been red many a 
time. 

About nine o'clock the moon was sufficiently 
bright for me to proceed on my way and I had 
no difficulty in following the trail at a fast walk, 
and in some places at a brisk trot until, about mid 
night, I reached the water hole where Powell had 
expected to camp. I came upon the spot unex 
pectedly, finding it entirely deserted, with no signs 
of having been recently occupied as a camp. 

I was interested to note that the tracks of the 
pursuing horsemen, for such I was now convinced 
they must be, continued after Powell with only a 
brief stop at the hole for water; and always at the 
same rate of speed as his. 

I was positive now that the trailers were 
Apaches and that they wished to capture Powell 
alive for the fiendish pleasure of the torture, so I 

[6] 



THE ARIZONA HILLS 



urged my horse onward at a most dangerous pace, 
hoping against hope that I would catch up with 
the red rascals before they attacked him. 

Further speculation was suddenly cut short by 
the faint report of two shots far ahead of me. I 
knew that Powell would need me now if ever, 
and I instantly urged my horse to his topmost 
speed up the narrow and difficult mountain trail. 

I had forged ahead for perhaps a mile or more 
without hearing further sounds, when the trail 
suddenly debouched onto a small, open plateau 
near the summit of the pass. I had passed through 
a narrow, overhanging gorge just before entering 
suddenly upon this table land, and the sight which 
met my eyes filled me with consternation and 
dismay. 

The little stretch of level land was white with 
Indian tepees, and there were probably half a 
thousand red warriors clustered around some 
object near the center of the camp. Their atten 
tion was so wholly riveted to this point of interest 
that they did not notice me, and I easily could have 
turned back into the dark recesses of the gorge and 
made my escape with perfect safety. The fact, 
however, that this thought did not occur to me 
until the following day removes any possible right 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



to a claim to heroism to which the narration of 
this episode might possibly otherwise entitle me. 

I do not believe that I am made of the stuff 
which constitutes heroes, because, in all of the 
hundreds of instances that my voluntary acts have 
placed me face to face with death, I cannot recall 
a single one where any alternative step to that I 
took occurred to me until many hours later. My 
mind is evidently so constituted that I am sub 
consciously forced into the path of duty without 
recourse to tiresome mental processes. However 
that may be, I have never regretted that cowardice 
is not optional with me. 

In this instance I was, of course, positive that 
Powell was the center of attraction, but whether 
I thought or acted first I do not know, but within 
an instant from the moment the scene broke upon 
my view I had whipped out my revolvers and was 
charging down upon the entire army of warriors, 
shooting rapidly, and whooping at the top of my 
lungs. Single handed, I could not have pursued 
better tactics, for the red men, convinced by sudden 
surprise that not less than a regiment of regulars 
was upon them, turned and fled in every direction 
for their bows, arrows, and rifles. 

The view which their hurried routing disclosed 
[8] 



ON THE ARIZONA HILLS 

filled me with apprehension and with rage. Under 
the clear rays of the Arizona moon lay Powell, 
his body fairly bristling with the hostile arrows of 
the braves. That he was already dead I could not 
but be convinced, and yet I would have saved his 
body from mutilation at the hands of the Apaches 
as quickly as I would have saved the man himself 
from death. 

Riding close to him I reached down from the 
saddle, and grasping his cartridge belt drew him 
up across the withers of my mount. A backward 
glance convinced me that to return by the way I 
had come would be more hazardous than to con 
tinue across the plateau, so, putting spurs to my 
poor beast, I made a dash for the opening to the 
pass which I could distinguish on the far side of 
the table land. 

The Indians had by this time discovered that I 
was alone and I was pursued with imprecations, 
arrows, and rifle balls. The fact that it is difficult 
to aim anything but imprecations accurately by 
moonlight, that they were upset by the sudden and 
unexpected manner of my advent, and that I was a 
rather rapidly moving target saved me from the 
various deadly projectiles of the enemy and per 
mitted me to reach the shadows of the surround
[9] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



ing peaks before an orderly pursuit could be 
organized. 

My horse was traveling practically unguided as 
I knew that I had probably less knowledge of the 
exact location of the trail to the pass than he, and 
thus it happened that he entered a defile which 
led to the summit of the range and not to the pass 
which I had hoped would carry me to the valley 
and to safety. It is probable, however, that to this 
fact I owe my life and the remarkable experiences 
and adventures which befell me during the follow 
ing ten years. 

My first knowledge that I was on the wrong 
trail came when I heard the yells of the pursuing 
savages suddenly grow fainter and fainter far off 
to my left. 

I knew then that they had passed to the left of 
the jagged rock formation at the edge of the 
plateau, to the right of which my horse had borne 
me and the body of Powell. 

I drew rein on a little level promontory over 
looking the trail below and to my left, and saw 
the party of pursuing savages disappearing around 
the point of a neighboring peak. 

I knew the Indians would soon discover that 
they were on the wrong trail and that the search 
[10] 



ON THE ARIZONA HILLS 

foi me would be renewed in the right direction as 
soon as they located my tracks. 

I had gone but a short distance further when 
what seemed to be an excellent trail opened up 
around the face of a high cliff. The trail was 
level and quite broad and led upward and in the 
general direction I wished to go. The cliff arose 
for several hundred feet on my right, and on my 
left was an equal and nearly perpendicular drop 
te the bottom of a rocky ravine. 

I had followed this trail for perhaps a hundred 
yards when a sharp turn to the right brought me 
to the mouth of a large cave. The opening was 
about four feet in height and three to four feet 
wide, and at this opening the trail ended. 

It was now morning, and, with the customary 
lack of dawn which is a startling characteristic of 
Arizona, it had become daylight almost without 
warning. 

Dismounting, I laid Powell upon the ground, 
but the most painstaking examination failed to 
reveal the faintest spark of life. I forced water 
from my canteen between his dead lips, bathed his 
face and rubbed his hands, working aver him con 
tinuously for the better part of an hour in the face 
of the fact that I knew him to be dead, 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



I was very fond of Powell; he was thoroughly 
a man in every respect ; a polished southern gentle 
man ; a staunch and true friend ; and it was with a 
feeling of the deepest grief that I finally gave up 
my crude endeavors at resuscitation. 

Leaving Powell's body where it lay on the ledge 
I crept into the cave to reconnoiter. I found a 
large chamber, possibly a hundred feet in diam 
eter and thirty or forty feet in height; a smooth 
and well-worn floor, and many other evidences that 
the cave had, at some remote period, been in 
habited. The back of the cave was so lost in dense 
shadow that I could not distinguish whether there 
were openings into other apartments or not. 

As I was continuing my examination I com 
menced to feel a pleasant drowsiness creeping over 
me which I attributed to the fatigue of my long 
and strenuous ride, and the reaction from the 
excitement of the fight and the pursuit. I felt 
comparatively safe in my present location as I 
knew that one man could defend the trail to the ( 
cave against an army. 

I soon became so drowsy that I could scarcely 

resist the strong desire to throw myself on the 

floor of the cave for a few moments' rest, but I 

knew that this would never do, as it would mean 

[12] 



ON THE ARIZONA HILLS 

certain death at the hands of my red friends, who 
might be upon me at any moment. With an effort 
I started toward the opening of the cave only to 
reel drunkenly against a side wall, and from there 
slip prone upon the floor. 



CHAPTER II 



A SENSE of delicious dreaminess overcame 
me, my muscles relaxed, and I was on the 
point of giving away to my desire to sleep when 
the sound of approaching horses reached my ears. 
I attempted to spring to my feet but was horrified 
to discover that my muscles refused to respond 
to my will. I was now thoroughly awake, but as 
unable to move a muscle as though turned to stone. 
It was then, for the first time, that I noticed a 
slight vapor filling the cave. It was extremely 
tenuous and only noticeable against the opening 
which led to daylight. There also came to my 
nostrils a faintly pungent odor, and I could 
only assume that I had been overcome by some 
poisonous gas, but why I should retain my mental 
faculties and yet be unable to move I could not 
fathom. 

I lay facing the opening of the cave and where 
I could see the short stretch of trail which lay 
between the cave and the turn of the cliff around 

[14] 



which the trail led. The noise of the approaching 
horses had ceased, and I judged the Indians were 
creeping stealthily upon me along the little ledge 
which led to my living tomb. I remember that 
I hoped they would make short work of me as I 
did not particularly relish the thought of the 
innumerable things they might do to me if the 
spirit prompted them. 

I had not long to wait before a stealthy sound 
apprised me of their nearness, and then a warbonneted, paint-streaked face was thrust cau 
tiously around the shoulder of the diff x and savage 
eyes looked into mine. That he could see me in 
the dim light of the cave I was sure for the early 
morning sun was falling full upon me through the 
opening. 

The fellow, instead of approaching, merely 
stood and stared; his eyes bulging and his jaw 
dropped. And then another savage face appeared, 
and a third and fourth and fifth t craning their 
necks over the shoulders of their fellows whom 
they could not pass upon the narrow ledge. Each 
face was the picture of awe and fear, but for what 
reason I did not know, nor did I learn until ten 
years later. That there were still other braves 
behind those who regarded me was apparent from 

[15] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



the fact that the leaders passed back whispered 
word to those behind them. 

Suddenly a low but distinct moaning sound 
issued from the recesses of the cave behind me, 
and, as it reached the ears of the Indians, they 
turned and fled in terror, panic stricken. So frantic 
were their efforts to escape from the unseen thing 
behind me that one of the braves was hurled head 
long from the cliff to the rocks below. Their wild 
cries echoed in the canyon for a short time, and 
then all was still once more. 

The sound which had frightened them was not 
repeated, but it had been sufficient as it was to 
start me speculating on the possible horror which 
lurked in the shadows at my back. Fear is a rela 
tive term and so I can only measure my feelings 
at that time by what I had experienced in previous 
positions of danger and by those I have passed 
through since; but I can say without shame that if 
the sensations I endured during the next few 
minutes were fear, then may God help the coward, 
for cowardice is of a surety its own punishment. 

To be held paralyzed, with one's back toward 
some horrible and unknown danger from the very 
sound of which the ferocious Apache warriors 
turn in wild stampede, as a flock of sheep would 



THE ESCAPE OF THE DEAD 

madly flee from a pack of wolves, seems to me the 
last word in fearsome predicaments for a man who 
had ever been used to fighting for his life with all 
the energy of a powerful physique. 

Several times I thought I heard faint sounds 
behind me as of some body moving cautiously, but 
eventually even these ceased, and I was left to the 
contemplation of my position without interruption. 
I could but vaguely conjecture the cause of my 
paralysis, and my only hope lay in that it might 
pass off as suddenly as it had fallen upon me. 

Late in the afternoon my horse, which had been 
standing with dragging rein before the cave, 
started slowly down the trail, evidently in search 
of food and water, and I was left alone with my 
mysterious unknown companion and the dead body 
of my friend, which lay just within my range of 
vision upon the ledge where I had placed it in the 
early morning. 

From then until possibly midnight all was 
silence, the silence of the dead; then, suddenly, 
the awful moan of the morning broke upon my 
startled ears, and there came again from the black 
shadows the sound of a moving thing, and a faint 
rustling as of dead leaves. The shock to my 
already overstrained nervous system was terrible 

[17] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



in the extreme, and with a superhuman effort I 
strove to break my awful bonds. It was an effort 
of the mind, of the will, of the nerves; not mus 
cular, for I could not move even so much as my 
little finger, but none the less mighty for all that. 
And then something gave, there was a momentary 
feeling of nausea, a sharp click as of the snapping 
of a steel wire, and I stood with my back against 
the wall of the cave facing my unknown foe. 

And then the moonlight flooded the cave, and 
there before me lay my own body as it had been 
lying all these hours, with the eyes staring toward 
the open ledge and the hands resting limply upon 
the ground. I looked first at my lifeless clay 
there upon the floor of the cave and then down 
at myself in utter bewilderment; for there I lay 
clothed, and yet here I stood but naked as at the 
minute of my birth. 

The transition had been so sudden and so unex 
pected that it left me for a moment forgetful of 
aught else than my strange metamorphosis. My 
first thought was, is this then death! Have I 
indeed passed over forever into that other life! 
But I could not well believe this, as I could 'feel 
my heart pounding against my ribs from the exer 
tion of my efforts to release myself from the 



THE ESCAPE OF THE DEAD 

anaesthesis which had held me. My breath was 
coming in quick, short gasps, cold sweat stood out 
from every pore of my body, and the ancient 
experiment of pinching revealed the fact that I 
was anything other than a wraith. 

Again was I suddenly recalled to my imme 
diate surroundings by a repetition of the weird 
moan from the depths of the cave. Naked and 
unarmed as I was, I had no desire to face the 
unseen thing which menaced me. 

My revolvers were strapped to my lifeless body 
which, for some unfathomable reason, I could not 
bring myself to touch. My carbine was in its boot, 
strapped to my saddle, and as my horse had wan 
dered off I was left without means of defense. 
My only alternative seemed to lie in flight and my 
decision was crystallized by a recurrence of the 
rustling sound from the thing which now seemed, 
in the darkness of the cave and to my distorted 
imagination, to be creeping stealthily upon me. 

Unable longer to resist the temptation to escape 
this horrible place I leaped quickly through the 
opening into the starlight of a clear Arizona night. 
The crisp, fresh mountain air outside the cave 
acted as an immediate tonic and I felt new life and 
new courage coursing through me. Pausing upon 

[19] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



the brink of the ledge I upbraided myself for what 
now seemed to me wholly unwarranted apprehen 
sion. I reasoned with myself that I had lain 
helpless for many hours within the cave, yet noth 
ing had molested me, and my better judgment, 
when permitted the direction of clear and logical 
reasoning, convinced me that the noises I had 
heard must have resulted from purely natural and 
harmless causes; probably the conformation of 
the cave was such that a slight breeze had caused 
the sounds I heard. 

I decided to investigate, but first I lifted my 
head to fill my lungs with the pure, invigorating 
night air of the mountains. As I did so I saw 
stretching far below me the beautiful vista of rocky 
gorge, and level, cacti-studded flat, wrought by the 
moonlight into a miracle of soft splendor and 
wondrous enchantment. 

Few western wonders are more inspiring 
than the beauties of an Arizona moonlit land 
scape; the silvered mountains in the distance, the 
strange lights and shadows upon hog back and 
arroyo, and the grotesque details of the stiff, yet 
beautiful cacti form a picture at once enchanting 
and inspiring; as though one were catching for the 
first time a glimpse of some dead and forgotten 

[20] 



THE ESCAPE OF THE DEAD 

world, so different is it from the aspect of any 
other spot upon our earth. 

As I stood thus meditating, I turned my gaze 
from the landscape to the heavens where the 
myriad stars formed a gorgeous and fitting 
canopy for the wonders of the earthly scene. My 
attention was quickly riveted by a large red star 
close to the distant horizon. As I gazed upon it 
I felt a spell of overpowering fascination it was 
Mars, the god of war, and for me, the fighting 
man, it had always held the power of irresistible 
enchantment. As I gazed at it on that far-gone 
night it seemed to call across the unthinkable void, 
to lure me to it, to draw me as the lodestone 
attracts a particle of iron. 

My longing was beyond the power of opposi 
tion; I closed my eyes, stretched out my arms 
toward the god of my vocation and felt myself 
drawn with the suddenness of thought through the 
trackless immensity of space. There was an 
instant of extreme cold and utter darkness. 



[21] 



CHAPTER III 

MY ADVENT ON MARS 

I OPENED my eyes upon a strange and weird 
landscape. I knew that I was on Mars; not 
once did I question either my sanity or my wakefulness. I was not asleep, no need for pinching 
here; my inner consciousness told me as plainly 
that I was upon Mars as your conscious mind tells 
you that you are upon Earth. You do not question 
the fact; neither did I. 

I found myself lying prone upon a bed of yel 
lowish, moss-like vegetation which stretched 
around me in all directions for interminable miles. 
I seemed to be lying in a deep, circular basin, 
along the outer verge of which I could distinguish 
the irregularities of low hills. 

It was midday, the sun was shining full upon 
me and the heat of it was rather intense upon my 
naked body, yet no greater than would have been 
true under similar conditions on an Arizona desert. 
Here and there were slight outcroppings of quartzbearing rock which glistened in the sunlight; and 
[22] 



MY ADVENT, ON MARS 



a little to my left, perhaps a hundred yards, 
appeared a low, walled enclosure about four feet 
in height. No water, and no other vegetation than 
the moss was in evidence, and as I was somewhat 
thirsty I determined to do a little exploring. 

Springing to my feet I received my first Martian 
surprise, for the effort, which on Earth would have 
brought me standing upright, carried me into the 
Martian air to the height of about three yards. 
I alighted softly upon the ground, however, with 
out appreciable shock or jar. Now commenced a 
series of evolutions which even then seemed 
ludicrous in the extreme. I found that I must 
learn to walk all over again, as the muscular exer 
tion which carried me easily and safely upon Earth 
played strange antics with me upon Mars. 

Instead of progressing in a sane and dignified 
manner, my attempts to walk resulted in a variety 
of hops whkh took me clear of the ground a 
couple of feet at each step and landed me sprawling 
upon my face or back at the end of each second 
or third hop. My muscles, perfectly attuned and 
accustomed to the force of gravity on Earth, 
played the mischief with me in attempting for the 
first time to cope with the lesser gravitation and 
lower air pressure on Mars. 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



I was determined, however, to explore the low 
structure which was the only evidence of habitation 
in sight, and so I hit upon the unique plan of 
reverting to first principles in locomotion, creep 
ing. I did fairly well at this and in a few moments 
had reached the low, encircling wall of the en 
closure. 

There appeared to be no doors or windows upon 
the side nearest me, but as the wall was but about 
four feet high I cautiously gained my feet and 
peered over the top upon the strangest sight it had 
ever been given me to see. 

The roof of the enclosure was of solid glass 
about four or five inches in thickness, and beneath 
this were several hundred large eggs, perfectly 
round and snowy white. The eggs were nearly 
uniform in size being about two and one-half feet 
in diameter. 

Five or six had already hatched and the gro 
tesque caricatures which sat blinking in the sun 
light were enough to cause me to doubt my sanity. 
They seemed mostly head, with little scrawny 
bodies, long necks and six legs, or, as I afterward 
learned, two legs and two arms, with an inter 
mediary pair of limbs which could be used at will 
either as arms or legs. Their eyes were set at the 

[24] 



MY ADVENT ON MARS 



extreme sides of their heads a trifle above the 
center and protruded in such a manner that they 
could be directed either forward or back and also 
independently of each other, thus permitting this 
queer animal to look in any direction, or in two 
directions at once, without the necessity of turning 
the head. 

The ears, which were slightly above the eyes 
and closer together, were small, cup-shaped 
antennae, protruding not more than an inch on 
these young specimens. Their noses were but 
longitudinal slits in the center of their faces, mid 
way between their mouths and ears. 

There was no hair on their bodies, which were 
of a very light yellowish-green color. In the 
adults, as I was to learn quite soon, this color 
deepens to an olive green and is darker in the 
male than in the female. Further, the heads of 
the adults are not so out of proportion to their 
bodies as in the case of the young. 

The iris of the eyes is blood red, as in Albinos, 
while the pupil is dark. The eyeball itself is very 
white, as are the teeth. These latter add a most 
ferocious appearance to an otherwise fearsome 
and terrible countenance, as the lower tusks curve 
upward to sharp points which end about where 
[25] 



'A PRINCESS OF MARS 



the eyes of earthly human beings are located. The 
whiteness of the teeth is not that of ivory, but 
of the snowiest and most gleaming of china. 
Against the dark background of their olive skins 
their tusks stand out in a most striking manner, 
making these weapons present a singularly for 
midable appearance. 

Most of these details I noted later, for I was 
given but little time to speculate on the wonders 
of my new discovery. I had seen that the eggs 
were in the process of hatching, and as I stood 
watching the hideous little monsters break from 
their shells I failed to note the approach of a score 
of full-grown Martians from behind me. 

Coming, as they did, over the soft and soundless 
moss, which covers practically the entire surface 
of Mars with the exception of the frozen areas 
at the poles and the scattered cultivated districts, 
they might have captured me easily, but their 
intentions were far more sinister. It was the rat 
tling of the accoutermcnts of the foremost warrior 
which warned me. 

On such a little thing my life hung that I often 
marvel that I escaped so easily. Had not the 
rifle of the leader of the party swung from its 
fastenings beside his saddle in such a way as to 

[26] 



MY ADVENT ON MARS 



strike against the butt of his great metal shod 
spear I should have snuffed out without ever know 
ing that death was near me. But the little sound 
caused me to turn, and there upon me, not ten 
feet from my breast, was the point of that huge 
spear, a spear forty feet long, tipped vith gleam 
ing metal, and held low at the side of a mounted 
replica of the little devils I had been watching. 

But how puny and harmless they now looked 
beside this huge and terrific incarnation of hate of 
vengeance and of death. The man himself, for 
such I may call him, was fully fifteen feet in height 
and, on earth, would have weighed some fourhundred pounds. He sat his mount as we sit a 
horse, grasping the animal's barrel with his lower 
limbs, while the hands of his two right arms held 
his immense spear low at the side of his mount; 
his two left arms were outstretched laterally to 
help preserve his balance, the thing he rode having 
neither bridle or reins of any description for 
guidance. 

And his mount! How can earthly words de 
scribe it! It towered ten feet at the shoulder; 
had four legs on either side; a broad flat tail, 
larger at the tip than at the root, and which it 
held straight out behind while running; a gaping 

[27] 



'A PRINCESS OF MARS 



mouth which split its head from its snout to its 
long, massive neck'. 

Like its master, it was entirely devoid of hair, 
but was of a dark slate color and exceeding smooth 
and glossy. Its belly was white, and its legs shaded 
from the slate of its shoulders and hips to a vivid 
yellow at the feet. The feet themselves were 
heavily padded and nailless, which fact had also 
contributed to the noiselessness of their approach, 
and, in common with a multiplicity of legs, is a 
characteristic feature of the fauna of Mars. The 
highest type of man and one other animal, the 
only mammal existing on Mars, alone have wellformed nails, and there are absolutely no hoofed 
animals in existence there. 

Behind this first charging demon trailed nine 
teen others, similar in all respects, but, as I learned 
later, bearing individual characteristics peculiar to 
themselves; precisely as no two of us are identical 
although we are all cast in a similar mold. This 
picture, or rather materialized nightmare, which 
I have described at length, made but one terrible 
and swift impression on me as I turned to meet it. 

Unarmed and naked as I was, the first law of 
nature manifested itself in the only possible solu 
tion of my immediate problem, and that was to 

[28] 



MY ADVENT ON MARS 



get out of the vicinity of the point of the charging 
spear. Consequently I gave a very earthly and at 
the same time superhuman leap to reach the top 
of the Martian incubator, for such I had deter 
mined it must be. 

My effort was crowned with a success which 
appalled me no less than it seemed to surprise the 
Martian warriors, for it carried me fully thirty 
feet into the air and landed me a hundred feet 
from my pursuers and on the opposite side of the 
enclosure. 

I alighted upon the soft moss easily and with 
out mishap, and turning saw my enemies lined up 
along the further wall. Some were surveying me 
with expressions which I afterward discovered 
marked extreme astonishment, and the others were 
evidently satisfying themselves that I had not 
molested their young. 

They were conversing together in low tones, 
and gesticulating and pointing toward me. Their 
discovery that I had not harmed the little Mar 
tians, and that I was unarmed, must have caused 
them to look upon me with less ferocity; but, as 
I was to learn later, the thing which weighed most 
in my favor was my exhibition of hurdling. 

While the Martians are immense, their bones 

[29] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



are very large and they are muscled only in pro 
portion to the gravitation which they must over 
come. The result is that they are infinitely less 
agile and less powerful, in proportion to their 
weight, than an Earth man, and I doubt that were 
one of them suddenly to be transported to Earth 
he could lift his own weight from the ground; in 
fact, I am convinced that he could not do so. 

My feat then was as marvelous upon Mars as 
it would have been upon Earth, and from desiring 
to annihilate me they suddenly looked upon me as 
a wonderful discovery to be captured and exhibited 
among their fellows. 

The respite my unexpected agility had given me 
permitted me to formulate plans for the immediate 
future and to note more closely the appearance 
of the warriors, for I could not disassociate these 
people in my mind from those other warriors who, 
only the day before, had been pursuing me. 

I noted that each was armed with several other 
weapons in addition to the huge spear which I 
have described. The weapon which caused me to 
decide against an attempt at escape by flight was 
what was evidently a rifle of some description, 
and which I felt, for some reason, they were pe 
culiarly efficient in handling. 

[30] 



MY ADVENT ON MARS 



These rifles were of a white metal stocked with 
wood, which I learned later was a very light and 
intensely hard growth much prized on Mars, and 
entirely unknown to us denizens of Earth. The 
metal of the barrel is an alloy composed principally 
of aluminum and steel which they have learned to 
temper to a hardness far exceeding that of the 
steel with which we are familiar. The weight of 
these rifles is comparatively little, and with the 
small caliber, explosive, radium projectiles which 
they use, and the great length of the barrel, they 
are deadly in the extreme and at ranges which 
would be unthinkable on Earth. The theoretic 
effective radius of this rifle is three hundred miles, 
but the best they can do in actual service when 
equipped with their wireless finders and sighters 
is but a trifle over two hundred miles. 

This is quite far enough to imbue me with great 
respect for the Martian firearm, and some tele 
pathic force must have warned me against an 
attempt to escape in broad daylight from under 
the muzzles of twenty of these death-dealing 
machines. 

The Martians, after conversing for a short 
time, turned and rode away in the direction from 
which they had come, leaving one of their number 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



alone by the enclosure. When they had covered 
perhaps two hundred yards they halted, and turn 
ing their mounts toward us sat watching the war 
rior by the enclosure. 

He was tke one whose spear had so nearly 
transfixed me, and was evidently the leader of 
the band, as I had noted that they seemed to 
have moved to their present position at his direc 
tion. When his force had come to a halt he dis 
mounted, threw down his spear and small arms, 
and came around the end of the incubator toward 
me, entirely unarmed and as naked as I, except 
for the ornaments strapped upon his head, limbs, 
and breast. 

When he was within about fifty feet of me he 
unclasped an enormous metal armlet, and holding 
it toward me in the open palm of his hand, 
addressed me in a clear, resonant voice, but in a 
language, it is needless to say, I could not under 
stand. He then stopped as though waiting for 
my reply, pricking up his antennae-like ears and 
cocking his strange looking eyes still further 
toward me. 

As the silence became painful I concluded to 
hazard a little conversation on my own part, as I 
had guessed that he was making overtures of peace. 

[32] 



MY ADFENT ON MARS 



The throwing down of his weapons and the with 
drawing of his troop before his advance toward 
me would have signified a peaceful mission any 
where on Earth, so why not, then, on Mars ! 

Placing my hand over my heart I bowed low 
to the Martian and explained to him that while 
I did not understand his language, his actions 
spoke for the peace and friendship that at the 
present moment were most dear to my heart. 
Of course I might have been a babbling brook 
for all the intelligence my speech carried to him, 
but he understood the action with which I imme 
diately followed my words. 

Stretching my hand toward him, I advanced 
and took the armlet from his open palm, clasping 
it about my arm above the elbow; smiled at him 
and stood waiting. His wide mouth spread into 
an answering smile, and locking one of his inter 
mediary arms in mine we turned and walked back 
toward his mount. At the same time he motioned 
his followers to advance. They started toward us 
on a wild run, but were checked by a signal from 
him. Evidently he feared that were I to be really 
frightened again I might jump entirely out of 
the landscape. 

He exchanged a few words with his men, 

[33] 



motioned to me that I would ride behind one of 
them, and then mounted his own animal. The 
fellow designated reached down two or three 
hands and lifted me up behind him on the glossy 
back of his mount, where I hung on as best I 
could by the belts and straps which held the 
Martian's weapons and ornaments. 

The entire cavalcade then turned and galloped 
away toward the range of hills in the distance. 



1341 



CHAPTER IV 

A PRISONER 

WE had gone perhaps ten miles when the 
ground began to rise very rapidly. We 
were, as I was later to learn, nearing the edge 
of one of Mars' long dead seas, in the bottom 
of which my encounter with the Martians had 
taken place. 

In a short time we gained the foot of the moun 
tains, and after traversing a narrow gorge came 
to an open valley, at the far extremity of which 
was a low tableland upon which I beheld an enor 
mous city. Toward this we galloped, entering it 
by what appeared to be a ruined roadway leading 
out from the city, but only to the edge of the table 
land, where it ended abruptly in a flight of broad 
steps. 

Upon closer observation I saw as we passed 
them that the buildings were deserted, and while 
not greatly decayed had the appearance of not 
having been tenanted for years, possibly for ages. 
Toward the center of the city was a large plaza, 

[35] ' 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



and upon this and in the buildings immediately 
surrounding it were camped some nine or ten 
hundred creatures of the same breed as my cap 
tors, for such I now considered them despite the 
suave manner in which I had been trapped. 

With the exception of their ornaments all were 
naked. The women varied in appearance but 
little from the men, except that their tusks were 
much larger in proportion to their height, in some 
instances curving nearly to their high-set ears. 
Their bodies were smaller and lighter in color, 
and their fingers and toes bore the rudiments of 
nails, which were entirely lacking among the 
males. The adult females ranged in height from 
ten to twelve feet. 

The children were light in color, even lighter 
than the women, and all looked precisely alike to 
me, except that some were taller than others ; older, 
I presumed. 

I saw no signs of extreme age among them, 
nor is there any appreciable difference in their 
appearance from the age of maturity, about 
forty, until, at about the age of one thousand 
years, they go voluntarily upon their last strange 
pilgrimage down the river Iss, which leads no 
living Martian knows whither and from whose 

[36] 



A PRISONER 



bosom no Martian has ever returned, or would 
be allowed to live did he return after once embark 
ing upon its cold, dark waters. 

Only about one Martian in a thousand dies of 
sickness or disease, and possibly about twenty take 
the voluntary pilgrimage. The other nine hun 
dred and seventy-nine die violent deaths in duels 
in hunting in aviation and in war; but perhaps 
by far the greatest death loss .comes during the 
age of childhood, when vast numbers of the little 
Martians fall victims to the great white apes of 
Mars. 

The average life expectancy of a Martian after 
the age of maturity is about three hundred years, 
but would be nearer the one-thousand mark were 
it not for the various means leading to violent 
death. Owing to the waning resources of the 
planet it evidently became necessary to counteract 
the increasing longevity which their remarkable 
skill in therapeutics and surgery produced, and so 
human life has come to be considered but lightly 
on Mars, as is evidenced by their dangerous sports 
and the almost continual warfare between the 
various communities. 

There are other and natural causes tending 
toward a diminution of population, but nothing 

[37] 



r A PRINCESS OF MARS 



contributes so greatly to this end as the fact that 
no male or female Martian is ever voluntarily 
without a weapon of destruction. 

As we neared the plaza and my presence was 
discovered we were immediately surrounded by 
hundreds of the creatures who seemed anxious to 
pluck me from my seat behind my guard. A word 
from the leader of the party stilled their clamor, 
and we proceeded at a trot across the plaza to 
the entrance of as magnificent an edifice as mortal 
eye has rested upon. 

The building was low, but covered an enormous 
area. It was constructed of gleaming white 
marble inlaid with gold and brilliant stones which 
sparkled and scintillated in the sunlight. The 
main entrance was some hundred feet in width 
and projected from the building proper to form 
a huge canopy above the entrance hall. There, 
was no stairway, but a gentle incline to the first 
floor of the building opened into an enormous 
chamber encircled by galleries. 

On the floor of this chamber, which was dotted 
with highly carved wooden desks and chairs, were 
assembled about forty or fifty mjle Martians 
around the steps of a rostrum. On the platform 
proper squatted an enormous warrior heavily 

[38] 



'A PRISONER 



loaded with metal ornaments, gay-colored feathers 
and beautifully wrought leather trappings ingen 
iously set with precious stones. From his shoul 
ders depended a short cape of white fur lined 
with brilliant scarlet silk. 

What struck me as most remarkable about this 
assemblage and the hall in which they were con 
gregated was the fact that the creatures were 
entirely out of proportion to the desks, chairs, 
and other furnishings; these being of a size 
adapted to human beings such as I, whereas the 
great bulks of the Martians could scarcely have 
squeezed into the chairs, nor was there room 
beneath the desks for their long legs. Evidently, 
then, there were other denizens on Mars than 
the wild and grotesque creatures into whose hands 
I had fallen, but the evidences of extreme antiquity 
which showed all around me indicated that these 
buildings might have belonged to some long extinct 
and forgotten race in the dim antiquity of Mars. 

Our party had halted at the entrance to the 
building, and at a sign from the leader I had 
been lowered to the ground. Again locking his 
arm in mine, we had proceeded into the audience 
chamber. There were few formalities observed 
in approaching the Martian chieftain. My captor 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



merely strode up to the rostrum, the others mak 
ing way for him as he advanced. The chieftain 
rose to his feet and uttered the name of my escort 
who, in turn, halted and repeated the name of 
the ruler followed by his title. 

At the time, this ceremony and the words they 
uttered meant nothing to me, but later I came to 
know that this was the customary greeting between 
green Martians. Had the men been strangers, 
and therefore unable to exchange names, they 
would have silently exchanged ornaments, had 
their missions been peaceful otherwise they 
would have exchanged shots, or have fought out 
their introduction with some other of their various 
weapons. 

My captor, whose name was Tars Tarkas, was 
virtually the vice-chieftain of the community, and 
a man of great ability as a statesman and warrior. 
He evidently explained briefly the incidents conf nected with his expedition, including my capture, 
and when he had concluded the chieftain addressed 
me at some length. 

I replied in our good old English tongue merely 
to convince him that neither of us could understand 
the other; but I noticed that when I smiled slightly 
on concluding, he did likewise. This fact, and 

[40] 



the similar occurrence during my first talk with 
Tars Tarkas, convinced me that we had at least 
something in common; the ability to smile, there 
fore to laugh; denoting a sense of humor. But I 
was to learn that the Martian smile is merely 
perfunctory, and that the Martian laugh is a 
thing to cause strong men to blanch in horror. 

The ideas of humor among the green men of 
Mars are widely at variance with our conceptions 
of incitants to merriment. The death agonies of 
& fellow being are, to these strange creatures, pro 
vocative of the wildest hilarity, while their chief 
form of commonest amusement is to inflict death 
on their prisoners of war in various ingenious and 
horrible ways. 

The assembled warriors and chieftains exam 
ined me closely, feeling my muscles and the tex 
ture of my skin. The principal chieftain then 
evidently signified a desire to see me perform, and, 
motioning me to follow, he started with Tars 
Tarkas for the open plaza. 

Now, I had made no attempt to walk, since 
my first signal failure, except while tightly grasp 
ing Tars Tarkas' arm, and so now I went skip 
ping and flitting about among the desks and chairs 
like some monstrous grasshopper. After bruis


A PRINCESS OF MARS 



ing myself severely, much to the amusement of 
the Martians, I again had recourse to creeping, 
but this did not suit them and I was roughly jerked 
to my feet by a towering fellow who had laughed 
most heartily at my misfortunes. 

As he banged me down upon my feet his face 
was bent close to mine and I did the only thing 
a gentleman might do under the circumstances of 
brutality, boorishness, and lack of consideration 
for a stranger's rights; I swung my fist squarely 
to his jaw and he went down like a felled ox. As 
he sunk to the floor I wheeled around with my 
back toward the nearest desk, expecting to be 
overwhelmed by the vengeance of his fellows, but 
determined to give them as good a battle as the 
unequal odds would permit before I gave up my 
life. 

My fears were groundless, however, as the 
other Martians, at first struck dumb with wonder 
ment, finally broke into wild peals of laughter and 
applause. I did not recognize the applause as 
such, but later, when I had become acquainted 
with their customs, I learned that I had won what 
they seldom accord, a manifestation of approba 
tion. 

The fellow whom I had struck lay where he had 

[42] 



A PRISONER 



fallen, nor did any of his mates approach him, 
Tars Tarkas advanced toward me, holding out 
one of his arms, and we thus proceeded to the 
plaza without further mishap. I did not, of 
course, know the reason for which we had come 
to the open, but I was not long in being enlightened, 
They first repeated the word "sak" a number of 
times, and then Tars Tarkas made several jumps, 
repeating the same word before each leap; then, 
turning to me, he said, "sak!" I saw what 
they were after, and gathering myself togethef 
1 "sakked" with such marvelous success that I 
cleared a good hundred and fifty feet; nor did I, 
this time, lose my equilibrium, but landed squarely 
upon my feet without falling. I then returned by 
easy jumps of twenty-five or thirty feet to the littlf 
group of warriors. 

My exhibition had been witnessed by several 
hundred lesser Martians, and they immediately 
broke into demands for a repetition, which the 
chieftain then ordered me to make; but I was 
both hungry and thirsty, and determined on the 
spot that my only method of salvation was tct 
demand the consideration from these creature? 
which they evidently would not voluntarily accord, 
I therefore ignored the repeated commands W 

[43] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



"sak," and each time they were made I motioned 
to my mouth and rubbed my stomach. 

Tars Tarkas and the chief exchanged a few 
words, and the former, calling to a young female 
among the throng, gave her some instructions 
and motioned me to accompany her. I grasped 
her proffered arm and together we crossed the 
plaza toward a large building on the far side. 

My fair companion was about eight feet tall, 
having just arrived at maturity, but not yet to her 
full height. She was of a light olive-green color, 
with a smooth, glossy hide. Her name, as I after 
ward learned, was Sola, and she belonged to the 
retinue of Tars Tarkas. Sh conducted me to a 
spacious chamber in one of the buildings fronting 
on the plaza, and which, from the litter of silks 
and furs upon the floor, I took to be the sleeping 
quarters of several of the natives. 

The room was well lighted by a number of 
large windows and was beautifully decorated with 
mural paintings and mosaics, but upon all there 
seemed to rest that indefinable touch of the finger 
of antiquity which convinced me that the archi 
tects and builders of these wondrous creations 
had nothing In common with the crude half-brutes 
which now occupied them. 
[44] 



A PRISONER 



Sola motioned me to be seated upon a pile of 
silks near the center of the room,, and, turning, 
made a peculiar hissing sound, as though signaling 
to some one in an adjoining room. In response to 
her call I obtained my first sight of a new Martian 
wonder. It waddled in on its ten short legs, and 
squatted down before the girl like an obedient 
puppy. The thing was about the size of a Shetland 
pony, but its head bore a slight resemblance to that 
of a frog, except that the jaws were equipped with 
three rows of long, sharp tusks. 



l4Sl 



CHAPTER V 

I ELUDE MY WATCH DOG 

SOLA stared into the brute's wicked-looking 
eyes, muttered a word or two of command, 
pointed to me, and left the chamber. I could not 
but wonder what this ferocious-looking monstros 
ity might do when left alone in such close prox 
imity to such a relatively tender morsel of meat; 
but my fears were groundless, as the beast, after 
surveying me intently for a moment, crossed the 
room to the only exit whrch led to the street, and 
lay down full length across the threshold. 

This was my first experience with a Martian 
watch dog, but it was destined not to be my last, 
for this fellow guarded me carefully during the 
time I remained a captive among these green men ; 
twice saving my life, and never voluntarily being 
away from me a moment. 

While Sola was away I took occasion to examine 
more minutely the room in which I found myself 
captive. The mural painting depicted scenes of 
rare and wonderful beauty: mountains, rivers, 



 ELUDE MY WATCH DOG 

__-______ _ __________ sx . 

lake, ocean, meadow, trees and flowers, winding 
roadways, sun-kissed gardens scenes which 
might have portrayed earthly views but for the 
different colorings of the vegetation. The work 
had evidently been wrought by a master hand, so 
subtle the atmosphere, so perfect the technique; 
yet nowhere was there a representation of a living 
animal, either human or brute, by which I could 
guess at the likeness of these other and perhaps 
extinct denizens of Mars. 

While I was allowing my fancy to run riot in 
wild conjecture on the possible explanation of the 
strange anomalies which I had so far met with on 
Mars, Sola returned bearing both food and drink. 
These she placed on the floor beside me, and seat 
ing herself a short ways off regarded me intently. 
The food consisted of about a pound of some solid 
substance of the consistency of cheese and almost 
tasteless, while the liquid was apparently milk 
from some animal. It was not unpleasant to the 
taste, though slightly acid, and I learned in a short 
time to prize it very highly. It came, as I later 
discovered, not from an animal, as there is only 
one mammal on Mars and that one very rare 
indeed, but from a large pknt which grows prac 
tically without water, but seems to distill its 
[47] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



ful supply of milk from the products of the soil, 
the moisture of the air, and the rays of the sun. 
A single plant of this species will give eight or 
ten quarts of milk per day. 

After I had eaten I was greatly invigorated, but 
feeling the need of rest I stretched out upon the 
silks and was soon asleep. I must have slept sev 
eral hours, as it was dark when I awoke, and I 
was very cold. I noticed that someone had thrown 
a fur over me, but it had become partially dis 
lodged and in the darkness I could not see to 
replace it. Suddenly a hand reached out and 
pulled the fur over me, shortly afterwards adding 
another to my covering. 

I presumed that my watchful guardian was Sola, 
nor was I wrong. This girl alone, among all the 
green Martians with whom I came in contact, 
disclosed characteristics of sympathy, kindliness, 
and affection ; her ministrations to my bodily wants 
were unfailing, and her solicitous care saved me 
from much suffering and many hardships. 

As I was to learn, the Martian nights are 
extremely cold, and as there is practically no 
twilight or dawn, the changes in temperature are 
sudden and most uncomfortable, as are the tran 
sitions from brilliant daylight to darkness. The 

[48] 



 ELUDE MY WATCH DOG 

nights are either brilliantly illumined or very dark, 
for if neither of the two moons of Mars happen 
to be in the sky almost total darkness results, since 
the lack of atmosphere, or, rather, the very thin 
atmosphere, fails to diffuse the starlight to any 
great extent; on the other hand, if both of the 
moons are in the heavens at night the surface of 
the ground is brightly illuminated. 

Both of Mars' moons are vastly nearer her than 
is our moon to Earth; the nearer moon being but 
about five thousand miles distant, while the fur 
ther is but little more than fourteen thousand 
miles away, against the nearly one-quarter million 
miles which separate us from our moon. The 
nearer moon of Mars makes a complete revolu 
tion around the planet in a little over seven and 
one-half hours, so that she may be seen hurtling 
through the sky like some huge meteor two or 
three times each night, revealing all her phases 
during each transit of the heavens. 
- The further moon revolves about Mars in some 
thing over thirty and one-quarter hours, and with 
her sister satellite makes a nocturnal Martian scene 
one of splendid and weird grandeur. And it is 
well that nature has so graciously and abundantly 
lighted the Martian night, for the green men of 

[49] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



Mars, being a nomadic race without high intel 
lectual development, have but crude means for 
artificial lighting; depending principally upon 
torches, a kind of candle, and a peculiar oil lamp 
which generates a gas and burns without a wick. 

This last device produces an intensely brilliant 
far-reaching white light, but as the natural oil 
which it requires can only be obtained by mining 
in one of several widely separated and remote 
localities it is seldom used by these creatures 
whose only thought is for today, and whose hatred 
for manual labor has kept them in a semi-barbaric 
state for countless ages. 

After Sola had replenished my coverings I 
again slept, nor did I awaken until daylight. The 
other occupants of the room, five in number, were 
all females, and they were still sleeping, piled 
high with a motley array of silks and furs. Across 
the threshold lay stretched the sleepless guardian 
brute, just as I had last seen him on the preceding 
day; apparently he had not moved a muscle; his, 
eyes were fairly glued upon me, and I fell to won 
dering just what might befall me should I endeavor 
to escape. 

I have ever been prone to seek adventure and 
to investigate and experiment where wiser men 



would have left well enough alone. It therefore 
now occurred to me that the surest way of learn 
ing the exact attitude of this beast toward me 
would be to attempt to leave the room. I felt 
fairly secure in my belief that I could escape him 
should he pursue me once I was outside the build 
ing, for I had begun to take great pride in my 
ability as a jumper. Furthermore, I could see 
from the shortness of his legs that the brute him 
self was no jumper and probably no runner. 

Slowly and carefully, therefore, I gained my 
feet, only to see that my watcher did the same; 
cautiously I advanced toward him, finding that 
by moving with a shuffling gait I could retain my 
balance as well as make reasonably rapid prog 
ress. As I neared the brute he backed cautiously 
away from me, and when I had reached the open 
he moved to one side to let me pass. He then 
fell in behind me and followed about ten paces 
in my rear as I made my way along the deserted 
street. 

Evidently his mission was to protect me only, 
I thought, but when we reached the edge of the 
city he suddenly sprang before me, uttering strange 
sounds and baring his ugly and ferocious tusks. 
Thinking to have some amusement at his expense, 



'A PRINCESS OF MARS 



I rushed toward him, and when almost upon him 
sprang into the air, alighting far beyond him 
and away from the city. He wheeled instantly 
and charged me with the most appalling speed 
I had ever beheld. I had thought his short legs 
a bar to swiftness, but had he been coursing with 
greyhounds the latter wou!4 have appeared as 
though asleep on a door mat. As I was to learn, 
this is the fleetest animal on Mars, and owing 
to its intelligence, loyalty, and ferocity is used in 
hunting, in war, and as the protector of the Mar 
tian man. 

I quickly saw that I would have difficulty in 
escaping the fangs of the beast on a straightaway 
course, and so I met his charge by doubling in my 
tracks and leaping over him as he was almost 
upon me. This maneuver gave me a considerable 
advantage, and I was able to reach the city quite 
a bit ahead of him, and as he came tearing after 
me I jumped for a window about thirty feet from 
'he ground in the face of one of the buildings over1 looking the valley. 

Grasping the sill I pulled myself up to a sitting 
posture without looking into the building, and 
gazed down at the baffled animal beneath me. My 
exultation was short lived, however, for scarcely 



1 ELUDE MY WATCH DOG 

had I gained a secure seat upon the sill than a 
huge hand grasped me by the neck from behind 
and dragged me violently into the room. Here 
I was thrown upon my back, and beheld standing 
over me a colossal ape-like creature, white and 
hairless except for an enormous shock of bristly 
hair upon its head. 



CHAPTER VI 



THE thing, which more nearly resembled our 
earthly men than it did the Martians I had 
seen, held me pinioned to the ground with one 
huge foot, while it jabbered and gesticulated at 
some answering creature behind me. This other, 
which was evidently its mate, soon came toward 
us, bearing a mighty stone cudgel with which it 
evidently intended to brain me. 

The creatures were about ten or fifteen feet tall, 
standing erect, and had, like the green Martians, 
an intermediary set of arms or legs, midway 
between their upper and lower limbs. Their eyes 
were close together and non-protruding; their ears 
were high set, but more laterally located than those 
of the Martians, while their snouts and teeth were 
strikingly like those of our African gorilla. Alto 
gether they were not unlovely when viewed in 
comparison with the green Martians. 

The cudgel was swinging in the arc which ended 
upon my upturned face when a bolt of myria 

[54] 



legged horror hurled itself through the doorway 
full upon the breast of my executioner. With a 
shriek of fear the ape which held me leaped 
through the open window, but its mate closed in a 
terrific death struggle with my preserver, which 
was nothing less than my faithful watch-thing; I 
cannot bring myself to call so hideous a creature 
a dog. 

As quickly as possible I gained my feet and 
backing against the wall I witnessed such a battle 
as it is vouchsafed few beings to see. The strength, 
agility, and blind ferocity of these two creatures 
is approached by nothing known to earthly man. 
My beast had an advantage in his first hold, hav 
ing sunk his mighty fangs far into the breast of 
his adversary; but the great arms and paws of 
the ape, backed by muscles far transcending those 
of the Martian men I had seen, had locked the 
throat of my guardian and slowly were choking 
out his life, and bending back his head and neck 
upon his body, where I momentarily expected the 
former to fall limp at the end of a broken neck. 

In accomplishing this the ape was tearing away 
the entire front of its breast, which was held in 
the vise-like grip of the powerful jaws. Back and 
forth upon the floor they rolled, neither one emit
[55] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



ting a sound of fear or pain. Presently I saw the 
great eyes of my beast bulging completely from 
their sockets and blood flowing from its nostrils. 
That he was weakening perceptibly was evident, 
but so also was the ape, whose struggles were 
growing momentarily less. 

Suddenly I came to myself and, with that strange 
instinct which seems ever to prompt me to my duty, 
I seized the cudgel, which had fallen to the floor 
at the commencement of the battle, and swinging 
it with all the power of my earthly arms I crashed 
it full upon the head of the ape, crushing his skull 
as though it had been an egg shell. 

Scarcely had the blow descended when I was 
confronted with a new danger. The ape's mate, 
recovered from its first shock of terror, had 
returned to the scene of the encounter by way of 
,the interior of the building. I glimpsed him just 
before he reached the doorway and the sight of 
him, now roaring as he perceived his lifeless fellow 
stretched upon the floor, and frothing at the 
mouth, in the extremity of his rage, filled me, I 
must confess, with dire forebodings. 

I am ever willing to stand and fight when the 
odds are not too overwhelmingly against me, but 
in this instance I perceived neither glory nor profit 

[56] 



A FIGHT THAT WON FRIENDS 

in pitting my relatively puny strength against the 
iron muscles and brutal ferocity of this enraged 
denizen of an unknown world; in fact, the only 
outcome of such an encounter, so far as I might 
be concerned, seemed sudden death. 

I was standing near the window and I knew 
that once in the street I might gain the plaza and 
safety before the creature could overtake me; at 
least there was a chance for safety in flight, against 
almost certain death should I remain and fight 
however desperately. 

It is true I held the cudgel, but what could I do 
with it against his four great arms ? Even should 
I break one of them with my first blow, for I 
figured that he would attempt to ward off the 
cudgel, he could reach out and annihilate me with 
the others before I could recover for a second 
attack. 

In the instant that these thoughts passed 
through my mind I had turned to make for the 
window, but my eyes alighting on the form of my 
erstwhile guardian threw all thoughts of flight to 
the four winds. He lay gasping upon the floor 
of the chamber, his great eyes fastened upon me 
in what seemed a pitiful appeal for protection. 
I could not withstand that look, nor could I, on 

[57] 



'A PRINCESS OF MARS 



second thought, have deserted my rescuer without 
giving as good an account of myself in his behalf 
as he had in mine. 

Without more ado, therefore, I turned to meet 
the charge of the infuriated bull ape. He was now 
too close upon me for the cudgel to prove of any 
effective assistance, so I merely threw it as heavily 
as I could at his advancing bulk. It struck him 
just below the knees, eliciting a howl of pain and 
rage, and so throwing him off his balance that he 
lunged full upon me with arms wide stretched to 
ease his fall. 

Again, as on the preceding day, I had recourse 
to earthly tactics, and swinging my right fist full 
upon the point of his chin I followed it with a 
smashing left to the pit of his stomach. The effect 
was marvelous, for, as I lightly side-stepped, after 
delivering the second blow, he reeled and fell upon 
the floor doubled up with pain and gasping for 
wind. Leaping over his prostrate body, I seized 
the cudgel and finished the monster before he 
could regain his feet. 

As I delivered the blow a low laugh rang out 
behind me, and, turning, I beheld Tars Tarkas, 
Sola, and three or four warriors standing in the 
doorway of the chamber. As my eyes met theirs 

[58] 



I was, for the second time, the recipient of their 
zealously guarded applause. 

My absence had been noted by Sola on her 
awakening, and she had quickly informed Tars 
Tarkas, who had set out immediately with a hand 
ful of warriors to search for me. As they had 
approached the limits of the city they had wit 
nessed the actions of the bull ape as he bolted 
into the building, frothing with rage. 

They had followed immediately behind him, 
thinking it barely possible that his actions might 
prove a clew to my whereabouts, and had wit 
nessed my short but decisive battle with him. This 
encounter, together with my set-to with the Mar 
tian warrior on the previous day and my feats of 
jumping placed me upon a high pinnacle in their 
regard. Evidently devoid of all the finer senti 
ments of friendship, love, or affection, these people 
fairly worship physical prowess and bravery, and 
nothing is too good for the object of their adora 
tion as long as he maintains his position by 
repeated examples of his skill, strength, and cour 
age. t 

Sola, who had accompanied the searching party 
of her own volition, was the only one of the Mar 
tians whose face had not been twisted in laughter 

[59] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



as I batded for my life. She, on the contrary, 
was sober with apparent solicitude and, as soon 
as I had finished the monster, rushed to me and 
carefully examined my body for possible wounds 
or injuries. Satisfying herself that I had come off 
unscathed she smiled quietly, and, taking my hand, 
started toward the door of the chamber. 

Tars Tarkas and the other warriors had entered 
and were standing over the now rapidly reviving 
brute which had saved my life, and whose life I, 
in turn, had rescued. They seemed to be deep in 
argument, and finally one of them addressed me, 
but remembering my ignorance of his language 
turned back to Tars Tarkas, who, with a word 
and gesture, gave some command to the fellow 
and turned to follow us from the room. 

There seemed something menacing in their atti 
tude toward my beast, and I hesitated to leave 
until I had learned the outcome. It was well I 
did so, for the warrior drew an evil-looking pistol 
from its holster and was on the point of putting 
an end to the creature when I sprang forward and 
struck up his arm. The bullet striking the wooden 
casing of the window exploded, blowing a hole 
completely through the wood and masonry. 

I then knelt down beside the fearsome looking 

[60] 



A FIGHT THAT WON FRIENDS 

thing, and raising it to its feet motioned for it to 
follow me. The looks of surprise which my actions 
elicited from the Martians were ludicrous; they 
could not understand, except in a feeble and child 
ish way, such attributes as gratitude and compas 
sion. The warrior whose gun I had struck up 
looked inquiringly at Tars Tarkas, but the latter 
signed that I be left to my own devices, and so 
we returned to the plaza with my great beast fol 
lowing close at heel, and Sola grasping me tightly 
by the arm. 

I had at least two friends on Mars; a young 
woman who watched over me with motherly solic 
itude, and a dumb brute which, as I later came to 
know, held in its poor ugly carcass more love, 
more loyalty, more gratitude than could have been 
found in the entire five million green Martians 
who rove the deserted cities and dead sea bottoms 
of Mars. 



[61] 



CHAPTER VII 

CHILD-RAISING ON MARS 

AFTER a breakfast, .which was an exact 
replica of the meal of the preceding day 
and an index of practically every meal which fol 
lowed while I was with the green men of Mars, 
Sola escorted me to the plaza, where I found the 
entire community engaged in watching or helping 
at the harnessing of huge mastodonian animals to 
great three-wheeled chariots 1 . There were about 
two hundred and fifty of these vehicles, each 
drawn by a single animal, any one of which, from 
their appearance, might easily have drawn the 
entire wagon train when fully loaded. 

The chariots themselves were large, commo 
dious, and gorgeously decorated. In each was 
seated a female Martian loaded with ornaments 
of metal, with jewels and silks and furs, and upon 
the back of each of the beasts which drew the 
chariots was perched a young Martian driver. Like 
the animals upon which the warriors were 
mounted, the heavier draft animals wore neither 



CHILD-RAISING ON MARS 

bit nor bridle, but were guided entirely by tel 
epathic means. 

This power is wonderfully developed in all 
Martians, and accounts largely for the simplicity 
of their language and the relatively few spoken 
words exchanged even in long conversations. It 
is the universal language of Mars, through the 
medium of which the higher and lower animals of 
this world of paradoxes are able to communicate 
to a greater or less extent, depending upon the 
intellectual sphere of the species and the develop 
ment of the individual. 

As the cavalcade took up the line of march in 
single file, Sola dragged me into an empty chariot 
and we proceeded with the procession toward the 
point by which I had entered the city the day 
before. At the head of the caravan rode some two 
hundred warriors, five abreast, and a like number 
brought up the rear, while twenty-five or thirty 
outriders flanked us on either side. 

Every one but myself men, women, and chil 
dren were heavily armed, and at the tail of 
each chariot trotted a Martian hound, my own 
beast following closely behind ours; in fact, the 
faithful creature never left me voluntarily during 
the entire ten years I spent on Mars. Our way 
[63] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



led out across the little valley before the city, 
through the hills, and down into the dead sea bot 
tom which I had traversed on my journey from 
the incubator to the plaza. The incubator, as it 
proved, was the terminal point of our journey this 
day, and, as the entire cavalcade broke into a mad 
gallop as soon as we reached the level expanse of 
sea bottom, we were soon within sight of our 
goal. 

On reaching it the chariots were parked with 
military precision on the four sides of the enclos 
ure, and half a score of warriors, headed by the 
enormous chieftain, and including Tars Tarkas 
and several other lesser chiefs, dismounted and 
advanced toward it. I could see Tars Tarkas 
explaining something to the principal chieftain, 
whose name, by the way, was, as nearly as I can 
translate it into English, Lorquas Ptomel, Jed; 
jed being his title. 

I was soon appraised of the subject of their con 
versation, as, calling to Sola, Tars Tarkas signed 
for her to send me to him. I had by this time 
mastered the intricacies of walking under Mar 
tian conditions, and quickly responding to his com 
mand I advanced to the side of the incubator 
where the warriors stood. 

[64] 



CHILD-RAISING ON MARS 

As I reached their side a glance showed me 
that all but a very few eggs had hatched, the incu 
bator being fairly alive with the hideous little 
devils. They ranged in height from three to 
four feet, and were moving restlessly about the 
enclosure as though searching for food. 

As I came to a halt before him, Tars Tarkas 
pointed over the incubator and said, "sak." I 
saw that he wanted me to repeat my performance 
of yesterday for the edification of Lorquas Ptomel, 
and, as I must confess that my prowess gave me 
no little satisfaction, I responded quickly, leaping 
entirely over the parked chariots on the far side of 
the incubator. As I returned, Lorquas Ptomel 
grunted something at me, and turning to his war 
riors gave a few words of command relative to 
the incubator. They paid no further attention to 
me and I was thus permitted to remain close and 
watch their operations, which consisted in break 
ing an opening in the wall of the incubator large 
enough to permit of the exit of the young 
Martians. 

On either side of this opening the women and 
the younger Martians, both male and female, 
formed two solid walls leading out through the 
chariots and quite away into the plain beyond, 

[65] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



Between these walls the little Martians scampered, 
wild as deer; being permitted to run the full length 
of the aisle, where they were captured one at a 
time by the women and older children ; the last in 
the line capturing the first little one to reach the 
end of the gauntlet, her opposite in the line cap 
turing the second, and so on until all the little 
fellows had left the enclosure and been appro 
priated by some youth or female. As the women 
caught the young they fell out of line and returned 
to their respective chariots, while those who fell 
into the hands of the young men were later turned 
over to some of the women. 

I saw that the ceremony, if it could be dignified 
by such a name, was over, and seeking out Sola 
I found her in our chariot with a hideous little 
creature held tightly in her arms. 

The work of rearing young, green Martians 
consists solely in teaching them to talk, and to 
use the weapons of warfare with which they are 
loaded down from the very first year of their lives. 
Coming from eggs in which they have lain for 
five years, the period of incubation, they step forth 
into the world perfectly developed except in size. 
Entirely unknown to their own mothers, who, in 
turn, would have difficulty in pointing out the 
[66] 



CHILD-RAISING ON MARS 

fathers with any degree of accuracy, they are the 
common children of the community, and their edu 
cation devolves upon the females who chance to 
capture them as they leave the incubator. 

Their foster mothers may not even have had 
an egg in the incubator, as was the case with Sola, 
who had not commenced to lay, until less than a 
year before she became the mother of another 
woman's offspring. But this counts for little 
among the green Martians, as parental and filial 
love is as unknown to them as it is common among 
us. I believe this horrible system which has been 
carried on for ages is the direct cause of the loss 
of all the finer feelings and higher humanitarian 
instincts among these poor creatures. From birth 
they know no father or mother love, they know 
not the meaning of the word home ; they are taught 
that they are only suffered to live until they can 
demonstrate by their physique and ferocity that 
they are fit to live. Should they prove deformed 
or defective in any way they are promptly shot; 
nor do they see a tear shed for a single one of the 
many cruel hardships they pass through from 
earliest infancy. 

I do not mean that the adult Martians are 
unnecessarily or intentionally cruel to the young, 

[67] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



but theirs is a hard and pitiless struggle for exist 
ence upon a dying planet, the natural resources of 
which have dwindled to a point where the support 
of each additional life means an added tax upon 
the community into which it is thrown. 

By careful selection they rear only the hardiest 
specimens of each species, and with almost super 
natural foresight they regulate the birth rate to 
merely offset the loss by death. Each adult Mar 
tian female brings forth about thirteen eggs each 
year, and those which meet the size, weight, and 
specific gravity tests are hidden in the recesses of 
some subterranean vault where the temperature is 
too low for incubation. Every year these eggs 
are carefully examined by a council of twenty 
chieftains, and all but about one hundred of the 
most perfect are destroyed out of each yearly 
supply. At the end of five years about five hun 
dred almost perfect eggs have been chosen from 
the thousands brought forth. These are then 
placed in the almost air-tight incubators to be 
hatched by the sun's rays after a period of another 
five years. The hatching which we had witnessed 
today was a fairly representative event of its kind, 
all but about one per cent of the eggs hatching in 
two days. If the remaining eggs ever batched we 
[68] 



CHILD-RAISING ON MARS 

knew nothing of the fate of the little Martians. 
They were not wanted, as their offspring might 
inherit and transmit the tendency to prolonged 
incubation, and thus upset the system which has 
maintained for ages and which permits the adult 
Martians to figure the proper time for return to 
the incubators, almost to an hour. 

The incubators are built in remote fastnesses, 
where there is little or no likelihood of their being 
discovered by other tribes. The result of such a 
catastrophe would mean no children in the commu 
nity for another five years. I was later to wit 
ness the results of the discovery of an alien incu 
bator. 

The community of which the green Martians 
with whom my lot was cast formed a part was 
composed of some thirty thousand souls. They 
roamed an enormous tract of arid and semi-arid 
land between forty and eighty degrees south lati 
tude, and bounded on the east and west by two 
large fertile tracts. Their headquarters lay in 
the southwest corner of this district, near the cross 
ing of two of the so-called Martian canals. 

As the incubator had been placed far north of 
their own territory in a supposedly uninhabited 
and unfrequented area, we had before us a tre
[69] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



mendous journey, concerning which I, of course, 
knew nothing. 

After our return to the dead city I passed sev 
eral days in comparative idleness. On the day fol 
lowing our return all the warriors had ridden forth 
early in the morning and had not returned until 
just before darkness fell. As I later learned, they 
had been to the subterranean vaults in which the 
eggs were kept and had transported them to the 
incubator, which they had then walled up for 
another five years, and which, in all probability, 
would not be visited again during that period. 

The vaults which hid the eggs until they were 
ready for the incubator were located many miles 
south of the incubator, and would be visited yearly 
by the council of twenty chieftains. Why they did 
not arrange to build % their vaults and incubators 
nearer home has always been a mystery to me, and, 
like many other Martian mysteries, unsolved and 
unsolvable by earthly reasoning and customs. 

Sola's duties were now doubled, as she was com 
pelled to care for the young Martian as well as 
for me, but neither one of us required much atten 
tion, and as we were both about equally advanced 
in Martian education, Sola took it upon herself to 
train us together. 

[70] 



CHILD-RAISING ON MARS 

Her prize consisted in a male about four feet 
tall, very strong and physically perfect; also, he 
learned quickly, and we had considerable amuse 
ment, at least I did, over the keen rivalry we dis 
played. The Martian language, as I have said, 
is extremely simple, and in a week I could make 
all my wants known and understand nearly every 
thing that was said to me. Likewise, under Sola's 
tutelage, I developed my telepathic powers so that 
I shortly could sense practically everything that 
went on around me. 

What surprised Sola most in me was that while 
I could catch telepathic messages easily from 
others, and often when they were not intended for 
me, no one could read a jot from my mind under 
any circumstances. At first this vexed me, but 
later I was very glad of it, as it gave me an 
undoubted advantage over the Martians. 



CHAPTER yill 

A FAIR CAPTIVE FROM THE SKY 

third day after the incubator ceremony 
JL we set forth toward home, bat scarcely had 
the Head of the procession debouched into the 
open ground before the city than orders were 
given for an immediate and hasty return. As 
though trained for years in this particular evolu 
tion, the green Martians melted like mist into 
the spacious doorways of the near-by buildings, 
until, in less than three minutes, the entire caval 
cade of chariots, mastodons and mounted warriors 
was nowhere to be seen. 

Sola and I had entered a building upon the 
front of the <nty, in fact, the same one in which 
I had had my encounter with the apes, and, wish 
ing to see what had caused the sudden retreat, I 
mounted to an upper floor and peered from the 
window out over the valley and the hills beyond ; 
and there I saw the cause of their sudden scurry 
ing to cover. A huge craft, long, low, and gray 
painted, swung slowly over the crest of the nearest 



A FAIR CAPTIFE FROM THE SKY 

hill. Following it came another, and another, and 
another, until twenty of them, swinging low above 
the ground, sailed slowly and majestically toward 
us. 

Each carried a strange banner swung from stem 
to stern above the upper works, and upon the prow 
of each was painted some odd device that gleamed 
in the sunlight and showed plainly even at the 
distance at whicfi we were from the vessels. I 
could see figures crowding the forward decks and 
upper works of the air craft. Whether they had 
discovered us or simply were looking at the 
deserted city I could not say, but in any event 
they received a rude reception, for suddenly and 
without warning the green Martian warriors fired 
a terrific volley from the windows of the buildings 
facing the little valley across which the great ships 
were so peacefully advancing. 

Instantly the scene changed as by magic; the 
foremost vessel swung broadside toward us, and 
bringing her guns into play returned our fire, at 
the same time moving parallel to our front for a 
short distance and then turning back with the evi 
dent intention of completing a great circle which 
would bring her up to position once more opposite 
our firing line ; the other vessels followed in her 

[73] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



wake, each one opening upon us as she swung into 
position. Our own fire never diminished, and I 
doubt if twenty-five per cent of our shots went 
wild. It had never been given me to see such 
deadly accuracy of aim, and it seamed as though 
a little figure on one of the craft dropped at the 
explosion of each bullet, while the banners and 
upper works dissolved in spurts of flame as the 
irresistible projectiles of our warriors mowed 
thrpugh them. 

The fire from the vessels was most ineffectual, 
owing, as I afterward learned, to the unexpected 
suddenness of the first volley, which caught the 
ship's crews entirely unprepared and the sighting 
apparatus of the guns unprotected from the deadly 
aim of our warriors. 

It seems that each green warrior has certain 
objective points for his fire under relatively iden 
tical circumstances of warfare. For example, a 
proportion of them, always the best marksmen, 
direct their fire entirely upon the wireless finding 
and sighting apparatus of the big guns of an 
attacking naval force; another detail attends to 
the smaller guns in the same way; others pick off 
the gunners ; still others the officers ; while certain 
other quotas concentrate their attention upon the 

[74] 



A FAIR CAPTIFE FROM THE SKY 

other members of the crew, upon the upper works, 
and upon the steering gear and propellers. 

Twenty minutes after the first volley the great 
fleet swung trailing off in the direction from which 
it had first appeared. Several of the craft were 
limping perceptibly, and seemed but barely under 
the control of their depleted crews. Their fire 
had ceased entirely and all their energies seemed 
focused upon escape. Our warriors then rushed 
up to the roofs of the buildings whkh we occupied 
and followed the retreating armada with a con 
tinuous fusillade of deadly fire. 

One by one, however, the ships managed to dip 
below the crests of the outlying hills until only one 
barely moving craft was in sight This had 
received the brunt of our fire and seemed to be 
entirely unmanned, as not a moving figure was 
visible upon her decks. Slowly she swung from 
her course, circling back toward us in an erratic 
and pitiful manner. Instantly the warriors ceased 
firing, for it was quite apparent that the vessel 
was entirely helpless, and, far from being in a 
position to inflict harm upon us, she could not even 
control herself sufficiently to escape. 

As she neared the city the warriors rushed out 
upon the plain to meet her, but it was evident that 
[75] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



she still was too high for them to hope to reach 
Eer decks. From my vantage point in the window 
I could see the bodies of her crew strewn about, 
although I could not make out what manner of 
creatures they might be. Not a sign of life was 
manifest upon her as she drifted slowly with the 
light breeze in a southeasterly direction. 

She was drifting some fifty feet above the 
ground, followed by all but some hundred of the 
warriors who had been ordered back to the roofs 
to cover the possibility of a return of the fleet, or 
of reinforcements. It soon became evident that 
she would strike the face of the buildings about 
a mile south of our position, and as I watched 
the progress of the chase I saw a number of war 
riors gallop ahead, dismount and enter the build 
ing she seemed destined to touch. 

As the craft neared the building, and just before 
she struck, the Martian warriors swarmed upon 
her from the windows, and with their great spears 
eased the shock of the collision, and in a few 
moments they had thrown out grappling hooks and 
the big boat was being hauled to ground by their 
fellows below. 

After making her fast, they swarmed the sides 
and searched the vessel from stem to stern. I 
[761 



A FAIR CAPTIVE FROM THE SKY 

could see them examining the dead sailors, e>idently for signs of life, and presently a party of 
them appeared from below dragging a little figure 
among them. The creature was considerably less 
than half as tall as the green Martian warriors, 
and from my balcony I could see that it walked 
erect upon two legs and surmised that it was some 
new and strange Martian monstrosity with which 
I had not as yet become acquainted. 

They removed their prisoner to the ground and 
then commenced a systematic rifling of the vessel. 
This operation required several hours, during 
which time a number of the chariots were requisi 
tioned to transport the loot, which consisted in 
arms, ammunition, silks, furs, jewels, strangely 
carved stone vessels, and a quantity of solid foods 
and liquids, including many casks of water, the 
first I had seen since my advent upon Mars. 

After the last load had been removed the war 
riors made lines fast to the craft and towed her 
far out into the valley in a southwesterly direction. 
A few of them then boarded her and were busily 
engaged in what appeared, from my distant posi 
tion, as the emptying of the contents of various 
carboys upon the dead bodies of the sailors and 
over the decks and works of the vessel. 

[77] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



This operation concluded, they hastily clam 
bered over her sides, sliding down the guy ropes to 
the ground. The last warrior to leave the deck 
turned and threw something back upon the vessel, 
waiting an instant to note the outcome of his act. 
As a faint spurt of flame rose from the point 
where the missile struck he swung over the side 
and was quickly upon the ground. Scarcely had 
he alighted than the guy ropes were simultaneously 
released, and the great warship, lightened by the 
removal of the loot, soared majestically into the 
air, her decks and upper works a mass of roaring 
flames. 

Slowly she drifted to the southeast, rising higher 
and higher as the flames ate away her wooden 
parts and diminished the weight upon her. Ascend 
ing to the roof of the building I watched her for 
hours, until finally she was lost in the dim vistas 
of the distance. The sight was awe-inspiring in 
the extreme as one contemplated this mighty float 
ing funeral pyre, drifting unguided and unmanned 
through the lonely wastes of the Martian heavens; 
a derelict of death and destruction, typifying the 
life story of these strange and ferocious creatures 
into whose unfriendly hands fate had carried it. 

Much depressed, and, to me, unaccountably so, 

[78] 



A FAIR CAPTIVE FROM THE SKY 

I slowly descended to the street. The scene I had 
witnessed seemed to mark the defeat and annihi 
lation of the forces of a kindred people, rather 
than the routing by our green warriors of a horde 
of similar, though unfriendly, creatures. I could 
not fathom the seeming hallucination, nor could 
I free myself from it; but somewhere in the inner 
most recesses of my soul I felt a strange yearning 
toward these unknown foemen, and a mighty hope 
surged through me that the fleet would return and 
demand a reckoning from the green warriors who 
had so ruthlessly and wantonly attacked it. 

Close at my heel, in his now accustomed place, 
followed Woola, the hound, and as I emerged 
upon the street Sola rushed up to me as though 
I had been the object of some search on her part. 
The cavalcade was returning to the plaza, the 
homeward march having been ghrea up for that 
day; nor, in fact, was it recommenced for more 
than a week, owing to the fear of a return attack 
by the air craft 

Lorquas Ptomel was too astute an old warrior 
to be caught upon the open plains with a caravan 
of chariots and children, and so we remained at 
the deserted city until the danger seemed passed. 

As Sola and I entered the plaza a sight met my 

[79] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



eyes which filled my whole being with a great surge 
of mingled hope, fear, exultation, and depression, 
and yet most dominant was a subtle sense of relief 
and happiness; for just as we neared the throng 
of Martians I caught a glimpse of the prisoner 
from the battle craft who was being roughly 
dragged into a near-by building by a couple of 
green Martian females. 

And the sight which met my eyes was that of a 
slender, girlish figure, similar in every detail to 
the earthly women of my past life. She did not 
see me at first, but just as she was disappearing 
through the portal of the building which was to be 
her prison she turned, and her eyes met mine. Her 
face was oval and beautiful in the extreme, her 
every feature was finely chiseled and exquisite, her 
eyes large and lustrous and her head surmounted 
by a mass of coal black, waving hair, caught 
loosely into a strange yet becoming coiffure. Her 
skin was of a light reddish copper color, against 
which the crimson glow of her cheeks and the ruby 
of her beautifully molded lips shone with a 
strangely enhancing effect. 

She was as destitute of clothes as the green 
Martians who accompanied her; indeed, save for 
her highly wrought ornaments she was entirely 
[So] 



A FAIR CAPTIVE FROM THE SKY 

naked, nor could any apparel have enhanced the 
beauty of her perfect and symmetrical figure. 

As her gaze rested on me her eyes opened wide 
in astonishment, and she made a little sign with 
her free hand; a sign which I did not, of course, 
understand. Just a moment we gazed upon each 
other, and then the look of hope and renewed 
courage which had glorified her face as she dis 
covered me, faded into one of utter dejection, 
mingled with loathing and contempt. I realized 
I had not answered her signal, and ignorant as I 
was of Martian customs, I intuitively felt that she 
had made an appeal for succor and protection 
which my unfortunate ignorance had prevented 
me from answering. 'And then she was dragged 
out of my sight into the depths of the deserted 
edifice. 



CHAPTER IX 

I LEARN THE LANGUAGE 

AS I came back to myself I glanced at Sola, 
.A. who had witnessed this encounter and I was 
surprised to note a strange expression upon her 
usually expressionless countenance. What her 
thoughts were I did not know, for as yet I had 
learned but little of the Martian tongue; enough 
only to suffice for my daily needs. 

As I reached the doorway of our building a 
strange surprise awaited me. A warrior ap 
proached bearing the arms, ornaments, and full 
accouterments of his kind. These he presented 
to me with a few unintelligible words, and a bear 
ing at once respectful and menacing. 

Later, Sola, with the aid of several of the other 
women, remodeled the trappings to fit my lesser 
proportions, and after they completed the work 
I went about garbed in all the panoply of war. 

From then on Sola instructed me in the mys 
teries of the various weapons, and with the Mar 
tian young I spent several hours each day prac


 LEARN THE LANGUAGE 

ticing upon the plaza. I was not yet proficient 
with all the weapons, but my great familiarity 
with similar earthly weapons made me an unusually 
apt pupil, and I progressed in a very satisfactory 
manner. 

The training of myself and the young Martians 
was conducted solely by the women, who not only 
attend to the education of the young in the arts 
of individual defense and offense, but are also the 
artisans who produce every manufactured article 
wrought by the green Martians. They make the 
powder, the cartridges, the fire arms ; in fact every 
thing of value is produced by the females. In 
time of actual warfare they form a part of the 
reserves, and when the necessity arises fight with 
even greater intelligence and ferocity than the 
men. 

The men are trained in the higher branches of 
the art of war; in strategy and the maneuvering 
of large bodies of troops. They make the laws 
as they are needed; a new law for each emergency,, 
They are unfettered by precedent in the admin 
istration of justice. Customs have been handed 
down by ages of repetition, but the punishment 
for ignoring a custom rs a matter for individual 
treatment by a jury of the culprit's peers, and I 



 rr 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



may say that justice seldom misses fire, but seems 
rather to rule in inverse ratio to the ascendency 
of law. In one respect at least the Martians are 
a happy people ; they have no lawyers. 

I did not see the prisoner again for several days 
subsequent to our first encounter, and then only 
to catch a fleeting glimpse of her as she was being 
conducted to the great audience chamber where 
I had had my first meeting with Lorquas Ptomel. 
I could not but note the unnecessary harshness and 
brutality with which her guards treated her; so 
different from the almost maternal kindliness 
which Sola manifested toward me, and the respect 
ful attitude of the few green Martians who took 
the trouble to notice me at all. 

I had observed on the two occasions when I had 
seen her that the prisoner exchanged words with 
her guards, and this convinced me that they spoke, 
or at least could make themselves understood by 
a common language. With this added incentive 
I nearly drove Sola distracted by my importunities 
to hasten on my education, and within a few more 
days I had mastered the Martian tongue suffi 
ciently well to enable me to carry on a passable 
conversation and to fully understand practically 
all that I heard. 

[84] 



 LEARN THE LANGUAGE 

At this time our sleeping quarters were occupied 
by three or four females and a couple of the 
recently hatched young, beside Sola and her youth 
ful ward, myself, and Woola the hound. After 
they had retired for the night it was customary 
for the adults to carry on a desultory conversation 
for a short time before lapsing into sleep, and 
now that I could understand their language I was 
always a keen listener, although I never proffered 
any remarks myself. 

On the night following the prisoner's visit to 
the audience chamber the conversation finally fell 
upon this subject, and I was all ears on the instant. 
I had feared to question Sola relative to the beau 
tiful captive, as I could not but recall the strange 
expression I had noted upon her face after my first 
encounter with the prisoner. That it denoted 
jealousy I could not say, and yet, judging all things 
by mundane standards as I still did, I felt it safer 
to affect indifference in the matter until I learned 
more surely Sola's attitude toward the object of 
my solicitude. 

Sarkoja, one of the older women who shared 
our domicile, had been present at the audience as 
one of the captive's guards, and it was toward her 
the questioners turned. 

[$] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



"When," asked one of the women, "will wr 
enjoy the death throes of the red one? or does 
Lorquas Ptomel, Jed, intend holding her for 
ransom?" 

" They have decided to carry her with us back 
to Thark, and exhibit her last agonies at the great 
games before Tal Hajus," replied Sarkoja. 

"What will be the manner of her going out?" 
inquired Sola. " She is very small and very beau 
tiful; I had hoped that they would hold her for 



ransom." 



Sarkoja and the other women grunted angrily 
at this evidence of weakness on the part of Sola. 

" It is sad, Sola, that you were not born a mil 
lion years ago," snapped Sarkoja, "when all the 
hollows of the land were filled with water, and the 
peoples were as soft as the stuff they sailed upon. 
In our day we have progressed to a point where 
such sentiments mark weakness and atavism. It 
will not be well for you to permit Tars Tarkas to 
learn that you hold such degenerate sentiments, as 
I doubt that he would care to entrust such as you 
with the grave responsibilities of maternity." 

"I see nothing wrong with my expression of 
interest in this red woman," retorted Sola. " She 
has never harmed us, nor would she should we 
[86] 



 LEARN 'THE LANGUAGE 

have fallen into her hands. It is only the men 
of her kind who war upon us, and I have ever 
thought that their attitude toward us is but the 
reflection of ours toward them. They live at peace 
with all their fellows, except when duty calls upon 
them to make war, while we are at peace with 
none; forever warring among our own kind as well 
as upon the red men, and even in our own com 
munities the individuals fight amongst themselves. 
Oh, it is one continual, awful period of blood 
shed from the time we break the shell until we 
gladly embrace the bosom of the river of mystery, 
the dark and ancient Iss which carries us to an 
unknown, but at least no more frightful and ter 
rible existence ! Fortunate indeed is he who meets 
his end in an early death. Say what you please to 
Tars Tarkas, he can mete out no worse fate to 
me than a continuation of the horrible existence 
we are forced to lead in this life." 

This wild outbreak on the part of Sola so greatly 
surprised and shocked the other women, that, 
after a few words of general reprimand, they all 
lapsed into silence and were soon asleep. One 
thing the episode had accomplished was to assure 
me of Sola's friendliness toward the poor girl, and 
also to convince me that I had been extremely 

[87] 



'A PRINCESS OF MARS 



fortunate in falling into her hands rather than 
those of some of the other females. I knew that 
she was fond of me, and now that I had discovered 
that she hated cruelty and barbarity I was confi 
dent that I could depend upon her to aid me and 
the girl captive to escape, provided of course that 
such a thing was within the range of possibilities. 

I did not even know that there were any better 
conditions to escape to, but I was more than willing 
to take my chances among people fashioned after 
my own mold rather than to remain longer among 
the hideous and bloodthirsty green men of Mars. 
But where to go, and how, was as much of a puzzle 
to me as the age old search for the spring of 
eternal life has been to earthly men since the begin 
ning of time. 

I decided that at the first opportunity I would 
take Sola into my confidence and openly ask her 
to aid me, and with this resolution strong upon 
me I turned among my silks and furs and slept 
the dreamless and refreshing sleep of Mars. 



[88] 



E 



CHAPTER X 

CHAMPION AND CHIEF 

ARLY the next morning I was astir. Con 
siderable freedom was allowed me, as Sola 
had informed me that so long as I did not attempt 
to leave the city I was free to go and come as I 
pleased. She had warned me, however, against 
venturing forth unarmed, as this city, like all other 
deserted metropolises of an ancient Martian 
civilization, was peopled by the great white apes 
of my second day's adventure. 

In advising me that I must not leave the boun 
daries of the city Sola had explained that Woola 
would prevent this anyway should I attempt it, and 
she warned me most urgently not to arouse his 
fierce nature by ignoring his warnings should I 
venture too close to the forbidden territory. His 
nature was such, she said, that he would bring me 
back into the city dead or alive should I persist 
in opposing him; "preferably dead," she added. 

On this morning I had chosen a new street to 
explore when suddenly I found myself at the 

[89] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



limits of the city. Before me were low hills pierceA 
by narrow and inviting ravines. I longed to 
explore the country before me, and, like the pioneer 
stock from which I sprang, to view what the land 
scape beyond the encircling hills might disclose 
from the summits which shut out my view. 

It also occurred to me that this would prove 
an excellent opportunity to test the qualities of 
Woola, I was convinced that the brute loved 
me; I had seen more evidences of affection in him 
than in any other Martian animal, man or beast, 
and I was sure that gratitude for the acts that had 
twice saved his life would more than outweigh 
his loyalty to the duty imposed upon him by cruel 
and loveless masters. 

As I approached the boundary line Woola ran 
anxiously before me, and thrust his body against 
my legs. His expression was pleading rather than 
ferocious, nor did he bare his great tusks or utter 
his fearful guttural warnings. Denied the friend 
ship and companionship of my kind, I had devel 
oped considerable affection for Woola and Sola, 
for the normal earthly man must have some outlet 
for his natural affections, and so I decided upon 
an appeal to a like instinct in this great brute, sure 
that I would not be disappointed. 

[90] 



CHAMPION AND CHIEF 



I had never petted nor fondled him, but now I 
sat upon the ground and putting my arms around 
his heavy neck I stroked and coaxed him, talking 
in my newly acquired Martian tongue as I would 
have to my hound at home, as I would have talked 
to any other friend among the lower animals. His 
response to my manifestation of affection was 
remarkable to a degree; he stretched his great 
mouth to its full width, baring the entire expanse 
of his upper rows of tusks and wrinkling his snout 
until his great eyes were almost hidden by the folds 
of flesh. If you have ever seen a collie smile you 
may have some idea of Woola's facial distortion. 

He threw himself upon his back and fairly wal 
lowed at my feet; jumped up and sprang upon 
me, rolling me upon the ground by his great 
weight; then wriggling and squirming around me 
like a playful puppy presenting its back for the 
petting it craves. I could not resist the ludicrousness of the spectacle, and holding my sides I rocked 
back and forth in the first laughter which had 
passed my lips in many days; the first, in fact, 
since the morning Powell had left camp when his 
horse, long unused, had precipitately and unex 
pectedly bucked him off headforemost into a pot of 
frijoles. 

[91] 



My laughter frightened Woola, his antics 
ceased and he crawled pitifully toward me, poking 
his ugly head far into my lap; and then I remem 
bered what laughter signified on Mars torture, 
suffering, death. Quieting myself, I rubbed the 
poor old fellow's head and back, talked to him 
for a few minutes, and then in an authoritative 
tone commanded him to follow me, and arising 
started for the hills. 

There was no further question of authority 
between us; Woola was my devoted slave from 
that moment hence, and I his only and undisputed 
master. My walk to the hills occupied but a few 
minutes, and I found nothing of particular interest 
to reward me. Numerous brilliantly colored and 
strangely formed wild flowers dotted the ravines 
and from the summit of the first hill I saw still 
other hills stretching off toward the north, and 
rising, one range above another, until lost in moun 
tains of quite respectable dimensions; though I 
afterward found that only a few peaks on all Mars 
exceed four thousand feet in height; the suggestion 
of magnitude was merely relative. 

My morning's walk had been large with impor 
tance to me for it had resulted in a perfect under 
standing with Woola, upon whom Tars Tarkas 

[92] 



CHAMPION AND CHIEF 



relied for my safe keeping. I now knew that while 
theoretically a prisoner I was virtually free, and 
I hastened to regain the city limits before the 
defection of Woola could be discovered by his 
erstwhile masters. The adventure decided me 
never again to leave the limits of my prescribed 
stamping grounds until I was ready to venture 
forth for good and all, as it would certainly result 
in a curtailment of my liberties as well as the 
probable death of Woola, were we to be dis 
covered. 

On regaining the plaza I had my third glimpse 
of the captive girl. She was standing with her 
guards before the entrance to the audience 
chamber, and as I approached she gave me one 
haughty glance and turned her back full upon me. 
The act was so womanly, so earthly womanly, 
that though it stung my pride it also warmed my 
heart with a feeling of companionship ; it was good 
to know that some one else on Mars beside myself 
had human instincts of a civilized order, even 
though the manifestation of them was so painful 
and mortifying. 

Had a green Martian woman desired to show 
dislike or contempt she would, in all likelihood, 
have done it with a sword thrust or a movement 

[93] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



of her trigger finger; but as their sentiments are 
mostly atrophied it would have required a serious 
injury to have aroused such passions in them. 
Sola, let me add, was an exception; I never saw 
her perform a cruel or uncouth act, or fail in uni 
form kindliness and good nature. She was indeed, 
a.s her fellow Martian had said of her, an atavism ; 
a dear and precious reversion to a former type 
of loved and loving ancestor. 

Seeing that the prisoner seemed the center of 
attraction I halted to view the proceedings. I 
had not long to wait for presently Lorquas Ptomel 
and his retinue of chieftains approached the build 
ing and, signing the guards to follow with the 
prisoner, entered the audience chamber. Realiz 
ing that I was a somewhat favored character, and 
also convinced that the warriors did not know of 
my proficiency in their language, as I had plead 
with Sola to keep this a secret on the grounds that 
I did not wish to be forced to talk with the men 
until I had perfectly mastered the Martian tongue, 
I chanced an attempt to enter the audience 
chamber and listen to the proceedings. 

The council squatted upon the steps of the ros 
trum, while below them stood the prisoner and 
her two guards. I saw that one of the women 

[94] 



CHAMPION AND CHIEF 



was Sarkoja, and thus understood how she had 
been present at the hearing of the preceding day, 
the results of which she had reported to the occu 
pants of our dormitory last night. Her attitude 
toward the captive was most harsh and brutal. 
When she held her, she sunk her rudimentary nails 
into the poor girl's flesh, or twisted her arm in 
a most painful manner. When it was necessary 
to move from one spot to another she either jerked 
her roughly, or pushed her headlong b'efore her. 
She seemed to be venting upon this poor defense 
less creature all the hatred, cruelty, ferocity, and 
spite of her nine hundred years, backed by unguessable ages of fierce and brutal ancestors. 

The other woman was less cruel because she 
was entirely indifferent; if the prisoner "had been 
left to her alon and fortunately she was at night, 
she would have received no harsh treatment, nor, 
by the same token would she have received any 
attention at all. 

As Lorquas Ptomel raised his eyes to address 
the prisoner they fell on me and he turned to Tars 
Tarkas with a word, and gesture of rmpatience. 
Tars Tarkas made some reply which I could not 
catch, but which caused Lorquas Ptomel to smile : 
after which they paid no further attention to me 

[95] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



" What is your name? " asked Lorquas Ptomel, 
addressing the prisoner. 

"Dejah Thoris, daughter of Mors Kajak of 
Helium." 

"And the nature of your expedition?" He con 
tinued. 

"It was a purely scientific research party sent 
out by my father's father, the Jeddak of Helium, 
to rechart the air currents, and to take atmospheric 
density tests," replied the fair prisoner, in a low, 
well modulated voice. 

"We were unprepared for battle," she con 
tinued, " as we were on a peaceful mission, as our 
banners and the colors of our craft denoted. The 
work we were doing was as much in your interests 
as in ours, for you know full well that were it not 
for our labors and the fruits of our scientific 
operations there would not be enough air or water 
on Mars to support a single human life. For ages 
we have maintained the air and water supply at 
practically the same point without an appreciable 
loss, and we have done this in the face of the 
brutal and ignorant interference of you green men. 

"Why, oh, why will you not learn to live in 
amity with your fellows, must you ever go on 
down the ages to your final extinction but little 

[96] 



CHAMPION AND CHIEF 



above the plane of the dumb brutes that serve you ! 
A people without written language, without art, 
without homes, without love ; the victims of eons 
of the horrible community idea. Owning every 
thing in common, even to your women and chil 
dren, has resulted in your owning nothing in 
common. You hate each other as you hate all else 
except yourselves. Come back to the ways of our 
common ancestors, come back to the light of kind 
liness and fellowship. The way is open to you, 
you will find the hands of the red men stretched 
out to aid you. Together we may do still more 
to regenerate our dying planet. The grand 
daughter of the greatest and mightiest of the red 
jeddaks has asked you. Will you come?" 

Lorquas Ptomel and the warriors sat looking 
silently and intently at the young woman for sev 
eral moments after she had ceased speaking. 
What was passing in their minds no man may 
know, but that they were moved I truly believe, 
and if one man high among them had been strong 
enough to rise above custom, that moment would 
have marked a new and mighty era for Mars. 

I saw Tars Tarkas rise to speak, and on his 
face was such an expression as I had never seen 
upon the countenance of a green Martian warrior. 
[97] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



1$ bespoke an inward and mighty battle with self, 
with heredity, with age-old custom, and as he 
opened his mouth to speak, a look almost of 
benignity, of kindliness, momentarily lighted up 
his fierce and terrible countenance. 

What words of moment were to have fallen 
from his lips were never spoken, as just then a 
young warrior, evidently sensing the trend of 
thought among the older men, leaped down from 
the steps of the rostrum, and striking the frail 
captive a powerful blow across the face, which 
felled her to the floor, placed his foot upon her 
prostrate form and turning toward the assembled 
council broke into peals of horrid, mirthless 
laughter. 

For an instant I thought Tars Tarkas would 
strike him dead, nor did the aspect of Lorquas 
Ptomel augur any too favorably for the brute, 
but the mood passed, their old selves reasserted 
their ascendency, and they smiled. It was por 
tentous however that they did not laugh aloud, for 
the brute's act constituted a side-splitting witticism 
according to the ethics which rule green Martian 
humor. 

That I have taken moments to write down a 
part of what occurred as that blow fell does not 

[98] 



CHAMPION AND CHIEF 



signify that I remained inactive for any such 
length of time. I think I must have sensed some 
thing of what was coming, for I realize now that 
I was crouched as for a spring as I saw the blow 
aimed at her beautiful, upturned, pleading face, 
and ere the hand descended I was halfway across 
the hall. 

Scarcely had his hideous laugh rang out but 
once, when I was upon him. The brute was twelve 
feet in height and armed to the teeth, but I believe 
that I could have accounted for the whole room 
ful in the terrific intensity of my rage. Springing 
upward, I struck him full in the face as he turned 
at my warning cry and then as he drew his shortsword I drew mine and sprang up again, upon his 
breast, hooking one leg over the butt of his pistol 
and grasping one of his huge tusks with my left 
hand while I delivered blow after blow upon his 
enormous chest. 

He could not use his short-sword to advantage 
because I was too close to him, nor could he draw 
his pistol, which he attempted to do in direct oppo 
sition to Martian custom which says that you may 
not fight a fellow warrior in private combat with 
any other than the weapon with which you are 
attacked. In fact he could do nothing but make a 

[99] 



A 'PRINCESS OF MARS 



wild and futile attempt to dislodge me. With all 
his immense bulk he was little if any stronger than 
I, and it was but the matter of a moment or two 
before he sank, bleeding and lifeless, to the floor. 

Dejah Thoris had raised herself upon one elbow 
and was watching the battle with wide, staring 
eyes. IWhen I had regained my feet I raised her 
in my arms and bore her to one of the benches at 
the side of the room. 

'Again no Martian interfered with me, and tear 
ing a piece of silk from my cape I endeavored to 
staunch the flow of blood from her nostrils. I 
was soon successful as her injuries amounted to 
little more than an ordinary nosebleed, and when 
she could speak she placed her hand upon my arm 
and looking up into my eyes, said : 

"Why did you it? You who refused me even 
friendly recognition in the first hour of my peril ! 
And now you risk your life and kill one of your 
companions for my sake. I cannot understand. 
What strange manner of man are you, that you 
consort with the green men, though your form 
is that of my race, while your color is little darker 
than that of the white ape? Tell me, are you 
human, or are you more than human?" 

" It is a strange tale," I replied, M too long to 
[100] 



CHAMPION AND CHIEF 



attempt to tell you now, and one which I so much 
doubt the credibility of myself that I fear to hope 
that others will believe it. Suffice it, for the 
present, that I am your friend, and, so far as our 
captors will permit, your protector and your 
servant." 

"Then you too are a prisoner? But why, then, 
those arms and the regalia of a Tharkian 
chieftain? What is your name? Where your 
country?" 

"Yes, Dejah Thoris, I too am a prisoner; my 
name is John Carter, and I claim Virginia, one of 
the United States of America Earth, as my home ; 
but why I am permitted to wear arms I do not 
know, nor was I aware that my regalia was that 
of a chieftain." 

We were interrupted at this juncture by the 
approach of one of the warriors, bearing arms, 
accouterments and ornaments, and in a flash one ' 
of her questions was answered and a puzzle cleared 
up for me. I saw that the body of my dead antag 
onist had been stripped, and I read in the menacing 
yet respectful attitude of the warrior who had 
brought me these trophies of the kill the same 
demeanor as that evinced by the other who had 
brought me my original equipment, and now for 
["I] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



the first time I realized that my blow, on the occa 
sion of my first battle in the audience chamber had 
resulted in the death of my adversary. 

The reason for the whole attitude displayed 
toward me was now apparent; I had won my spurs, 
so to speak, and in the crude justice, which always 
marks Martian dealings, and which, among other 
things, has caused me to call her the planet of 
paradoxes, I was accorded the honors due a con 
queror; the trappings and the position of the man 
I killed. In truth, I was a Martian chieftain, and 
this I learned later was the cause of my great free 
dom and my toleration in the audience chamber. 

As I had turned to receive the dead warrior's 
chattels I had noticed that Tars Tarkas and sev 
eral others had pushed forward toward us, and 
the eyes of the former rested upon me in a most 
quizzical manner. Finally he addressed me : 

"You speak the tongue of Barsoom quite 
readily for one who was deaf and dumb to us a 
few short days ago. Where did you learn it, John 
Carter?" 

"You, yourself, are responsible, Tars Tarkas," 
I replied, "in that you furnished me with an 
instructress of remarkable ability; I have to thanK 
Sola for my learning." 

f 102] 



CHAMPION AND CHIEF 



"She has done well," he answered, "but your 
education in other respects needs considerable 
polish. Do you know what your unprecedented 
temerity would have cost you had you failed to 
kill either of the two chieftains whose metal you 
now wear?" 

"I presume that that one whom I had failed 
to kill, would have killed me," I answered, smiling. 

11 No, you are wrong. Only in the last extremity 
of self-defense would a Martian warrior kill a 
prisoner ; we like to save them for other purposes," 
and his face bespoke possibilities that were not 
pleasant to dwell upon. 

"But one thing can save you now," he con 
tinued. "Should you, in recognition of your 
remarkable valor, ferocity, and prowess, be con 
sidered by Tal Hajus as worthy of his service you 
may be taken into the community and become a 
full-fledged Tharkian. Until we reach the head 
quarters of Tal Hajus it is the will of Lorquas 
Ptomel that you be accorded the respect your 
acts have earned you. You will be treated by us 
as a Tharkian chieftain, but you must not forget 
that every chief who ranks you is responsible for 
your safe delivery to our mighty and most fero 
cious ruler. I am done." 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



"I hear you, Tars Tarkas," I answered. "As 
you know I am not of Barsoom; your ways are 
not my ways, and I can only act in the future as 
I have Hi the past, m accordance with the dictates 
of my conscience and guided by the standards of 
mine own people. If you will leave me alone I 
will go in peace, but if not, let the individual Barsoomians with whom I must deal either respect 
my rights as a stranger among you, or take what 
ever consequences may befall. Of one thiny let 
us be sure, whatever may be your ultimate inten 
tions toward this unfortunate young woman, who 
ever would offer her injury or insult in the future 
must figure on making a full accounting to me. 
I understand that you belittle all sentiments of 
generosity and kindliness, but I do not, and I can 
convince your most doughty warrior that these 
characteristics are not incompatible with an ability 
to fight." 

Ordinarily I am not given to long speeches, 
nor ever before had I descended to bombast, but 
I had guessed at the keynote which would strike 
an answering chord in the breasts of the green 
Martians, nor was I wrong, for my harangue evi 
dently deeply impressed them, and their attitude 
toward me thereafter was still further respectful. 
[104] 



CH'AMPION 'AND CHIEF 



Tars Tarkas himself seemed pleased with my 
reply, but his only comment was more or less 
enigmatical "And I think I know Tal Hajus, 
Jeddak of Thark." 

I now turned my attention to Dejah Thoris., 
and assisting her to her feet I turned with her 
toward the exit, ignoring her hovering guardian 
harpies as well as the inquiring glances of the 
chieftains. Was I not now a chieftain also ! Well, 
then, I would assume the responsibilities of one. 
They did not molest us, and so Dejah Thoris, 
Princess of Helium, and John Carter, gentleman 
of Virginia, followed by the faithful Woola, 
passed through utter silence from the audience 
chamber of Lorquas Ptomel, Jed among the 
Tharks of Barsoom. 



CHAPTER XI 

WITH DEJAH THORIS 

AS we reached the open the two female guards 
-JLwho had been detailed to watch over Dejah 
Thoris hurried up and made as though to assume 
custody of her once more. The poor child shrank 
against me and I felt her two little hands fold 
tightly over my arm. Waving the women away, 
I informed them that Sola would attend the cap 
tive hereafter, and I further warned Sarkoja that 
any more of her cruel attentions bestowed upon 
Dejah Thoris would result in Sarkoja's sudden 
and painful demise. 

My threat was unfortunate and resulted in more 
harm than good to Dejah Thoris, for, as I learned 
later, men do not kill women upon Mars, nor 
women, men. So Sarkoja merely gave us an ugly 
look and departed to hatch up deviltries against us. 

I soon found Sola and explained to her that 

I wished her to guard Dejah Thoris as she had 

guarded me; that I wished her to find other 

quarters where they would not be molested hi" 

[106] 



WITH DEJAH THORIS 



Sarkoja, and I finally informed her that I myself 
would take up my quarters among the men. 

Sola glanced at the accouterments which were 
carried in my hand and slung across my shoulder. 

" You are a great chieftain now, John Carter," 
she said, "and I must do your bidding, though 
indeed I am glad to do it under any circumstances. 
The man whose metal you carry was young, but 
he was a great warrior, and had by his promotions 
and kills won his way close to the rank of Tars 
Tarkas, who, as you know, is second to Lorquas 
Ptomel only. You are eleventh, there are but ten 
chieftains in this community who rank you in 
prowess." 

"And if I should kill Lorquas Ptomel?" I 
asked. 

" You would be first, John Carter; but you may 
only win that honor by the will of the entire coun 
cil that Lorquas Ptomel meet you in combat, or 
should he attack you, you may kill him in selfdefense, and thus win first place." 

I laughed, and changed the subject. I had no 
particular desire to kill Lorquas Ptomel, and less 
to be a jed among the Tharks. 

I accompanied Sola and Dejah Thoris in a 
search for new quarters, which we found in a build[107] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



ing nearer the audience chamber and of far more 
pretentious architecture than our former habita 
tion. We also found in this building real sleeping 
apartments with ancient beds of highly wrought 
metal swinging from enormous gold chains depend 
ing from the marble ceilings. The decoration of 
the walls was most elaborate, and, unlike the 
frescoes in the other buildings I had examined, 
portrayed many human figures in the compositions. 
These were of people like myself, and of a much 
lighter color than Dejah Thoris. They were clad 
in graceful, flowing robes, highly ornamented with! 
metal and jewels, and their luxuriant hair was of 
a beautiful golden and reddish bronze. The men 
were beardless and only a few wore arms. The 
scenes depicted for the most part, a fair-skinned, 
fair-haired people at play. 

Dejah Thoris clasped her hands with an 
exclamation of rapture as she gazed upon these 
magnificent works of art, wrought by a people 
long extinct; while Sola, on the other hand, appar 
ently did not see them. 

We decided to use this room, on the second 

floor and overlooking the plaza, for Dejah Thoris 

and Sola, and another room adjoining and in the 

rear for the cooking and supplies. I then dis
[108] 



WITH DEJAH THORIS 



patched Sola to bring the bedding and such food 
and utensils as she might need, telling her that 
I would guard Dejah Thoris until her return. 

As Sola departed Dejah Thoris turned to me 
with a faint smile. 

" And whereto, then, would your prisoner escape 
should you leave her, unless it was to follow you 
and crave your protection, and ask your pardon 
for the cruel thoughts she has harbored against 
you these past few days?" 

"You are right," I answered, "there is no 
escape for either of us unless we go together." 

" I heard your challenge to the creature you call 
Tars Tarkas, and I think I understand your posi 
tion among these people, but what I cannot fathom 
is your statement that you are not of Barsoom. 

" In the name of my first ancestor, then," she 
continued, "where may you be from? You are 
like unto my people, and yet so unlike. You speak 
my language, and yet I heard you tell Tars Tarkas 
that you had but learned it recently. All Barsoomians speak the same tongue from the ice-clad 
south to the ice-clad north, though their written 
languages differ. Only in the valley Dor, where 
the river Iss empties into the lost sea of Korus, 
is there supposed to be a different language spokeni 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



and, except in the legends of our ancestors, there 
is no record of a Barsoomian returning up the 
river Iss, from the shores of Korus in the valley 
of Dor. Do not tell me that you have thus 
returned ! They would kill you horribly anywhere 
upon the surface of Barsoom if that were true; 
tell me it is not I " 

Her eyes were filled with a strange, weird light; 
her voice was pleading, and her little hands, 
reached up upon my breast, were pressed against 
me as though to wring a denial from my very 
heart. 

"I do not know your customs, Dejah Thoris, 
but in my own Virginia a gentleman does not lie 
to save himself; I am not of Dor; I have never 
seen the mysterious Iss; the lost sea of Korus is 
still lost, so far as I am concerned. Do you 
believe me?" 

And then it struck me suddenly that I was very 
anxious that she should believe me. It was not 
that I feared the results which would follow a 
general belief that I had returned from the Bar 
soomian heaven or hell, or whatever it was. Why 
was it, then I Why should I care what she 
thought? I looked down at her; her beautiful 
face upturned, and her wonderful eyes opening up 
[no] 



WITH DEJAH THORIS 



the very depth of her soul; and as my eyes met 
hers I knew why, and I shuddered. 

A similar wave of feeling seemed to stir her; 
she drew away from me with a sigh, and with her 
earnest, beautiful face turned up to mine, she whis 
pered: "I believe you, John Garter; I do not 
know what a gentleman' is, nor have I ever 
heard before of Virginia ; but on Barsoom no man 
lies; if he does not wish to speak the truth he is 
silent. Where is this Virginia, your country, John 
Carter?" she asked, and it seemed that this fair 
name of my fair land had never sounded more 
beautiful than as it fell from those perfect lips on 
that far gone day. 

"I am of another world," I answered, "the 
great planet Earth, which revolves about our com 
mon sun and next within the orbit of your Barsoom, 
which we know as Mars. How I came here I 
cannot tell you, for I do not know; hut here I am, 
and since my presence has permitted me to serve 
Dejah Thoris I am glad that I am here." 

She gazed at me with troubled eyes, long and 
questioningly. That it was difficult to believe my 
statement I well knew, nor could I hope that she 
would do so however much I craved her confidence 
and respect. I would much rather not have fld 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



her anything of my antecedents, but no man could 
look into the depth of those eyes and refuse her 
slightest behest. 

Finally she smiled, and, rising, said: "I shall 
have to believe even though I cannot understand. 
I can readily perceive that you are not of the 
Barsoom of today; you are like us, yet different 
but why should I trouble my poor head with such a 
problem, when my heart tells me that I believe 
because I wish to believe ! " 

It was good logic, good, earthly, feminine logic, 
and if it satisfied her I certainly could pick no 
flaws in it. As a matter of fact it was about the 
only kind of logic that could be brought to bear 
upon my problem. We fell into a general con 
versation then, asking and answering many ques 
tions on each side. She was curious to learn of 
the customs of my people and displayed a remark 
able knowledge of events on earth. When I 
questioned her closely on this seeming familiarity 
with earthly things she laughed, and cried out : 

"Why every school boy on Barsoom knows 
the geography, and much concerning the fauna 
and flora, as well as the history of your planet 
fully as well as of his own. Can we not see every 
thing which takes place upon Earth, as you call 
[112] 



WITH DEJAH THORIS 



it; is it not hanging there in the heavens in plain 
sight?" 

This baffled me, I must confess, fully as much 
as my statements had confounded her; and I told 
her so. She then explained in general the instru 
ments her people had used and been perfecting 
for ages, .which permit them to throw upon a 
screen a perfect image of what is transpiring upon 
any planet and upon many of the stars. These 
pictures are so perfect in detail that, when photo 
graphed and enlarged, objects no greater than a 
blade of grass may be distinctly recognized. I 
afterward, in Helium, saw many of these pic 
tures, as well as the instruments which produced 
them. 

"If, then, you are so familiar with earthly 
things," I asked, " why is it that you do not recog 
nize me as identical with the inhabitants of that 
planet?" 

She smiled again as one might in bored indul 
gence of a questioning child. 

"Because, John Carter," she replied, "nearly 
every planet and star having atmospheric condi 
tions at all approaching those of Bapsoom, shows 
forms of animal life almost identical with yo& and 
me; and, further, Earth men, almost without 

["3] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



exception, cover their bodies with strange, un 
sightly pieces of cloth, and their heads with 
hideous contraptions the purpose of which we have 
been unable to conceive; while you, when found 
by the Tharkian warriors, were entirely undisfigured and unadorned. 

"The fact that you wore no ornaments is a 
strong proof of your un-Barsoomian origin, while 
the absence of grotesque coverings might cause 
a doubt as to your earthliness." 

I then narrated the details of my departure from 
the Earth, explaining that my body there lay 
fully clothed in all the, to her, strange garments 
of mundane dwellers. At this point Sola returned 
with our meager belongings and her young Martian 
protege, who, of course, would have to share the 
quarters with them. 

Sola asked us if we had had a visitor during 
her absence, and seemed much surprised when we 
answered in the negative. It seemed that as she 
had mounted the approach to the upper floors 
where our quarters were located, she had met 
Sarkoja descending. We decided that she must 
have been eavesdropping, but as we could recall 
nothing of importance that had passed between 
us we dismissed the matter as of little consequence , 



WITH DEJAH THORIS 



merely promising ourselves to be warned to the 
utmost caution in the future. 

Dejah Thoris and I then fell to examining the 
architecture and decorations of the beautiful 
chambers of the building we were occupying. She 
told me that these people had presumably 
flourished over a hundred thousand years before. 
They were the early progenitors of her race, but 
had mixed with the other great race of early Mar 
tians, who were very dark, almost black, and also 
with the reddish yellow race which had flourished 
at the same time. 

These three great divisions of the higher Mar 
tians had been forced into a mighty alliance as 
the drying up of the Martian seas had compelled 
them to seek the comparatively few and always 
diminishing fertile areas, and to defend them 
selves, under new conditions of life, against the 
wild hordes of green men. 

Ages of close relationship and intermarrying 
had resulted in the race of red men, of which 
Dejah Thoris was a fair and beautiful daughter. 
During the ages of hardships and incessant war 
ring between their own various races, as well as 
with the green men, and before they had fitted 
themselves to the changed conditions,, much of the 



'A PRINCESS OF MARS 



high civilization and many of the arts of the fairhaired Martians had become lost; but the red race 
of today has reached a point where it feels that 
it has made up in new discoveries and in a more 
practical civilization for all that lies irretrievably 
buried with the ancient Barsoomians, beneath the 
countless intervening ages. 

These ancient Martians had been a highly cul 
tivated and literary race, but during the vicissi 
tudes of those trying centuries of readjustment to 
new conditions, not only did their advancement 
and production cease entirely, but practically all 
their archives, records, and literature were lost. 

Dejah Thoris related many interesting facts and 
legends concerning this lost race of noble and 
kindly people. She said that the city in which we 
were camping was supposed to have been a center 
of commerce and culture known as Korad. It had 
been built upon a beautiful, natural harbor, land 
locked by magnificent hills. The little valley on 
the west front of the city, she explained, was all 
that remained of the harbor, while the pass 
through the hHls to the old sea bottom had been 
the channel through which the shipping passed up 
to the city's gates. 

The shores of the ancient seas were dotted with 
[116] 



WITH DEJAH THORIS 



just such cities, and lesser ones, in diminishing num 
bers, were to be found converging toward the 
center of the oceans, as the people had found it 
necessary to follow the receding waters until neces 
sity had forced upon them their ultimate salvation, 
the so-called Martian canals. 

We had been so engrossed in exploration of the 
building and in our conversation that it was late 
in the afternoon before we realized it. We were 
brought back to a realization of our present con 
ditions by a messenger bearing a summons from 
Lorquas Ptomel directing me to appear before 
him forthwith. Bidding Dejah Thoris and Sola 
farewell, and commanding Woola to remain on 
guard, I hastened to the audience chamber, where 
I found Lorquas Ptomel and Tars Tarkas seated 
upon the rostrum. 



CHAPTER XII 

A PRISONER WITH POWER 

S I entered and saluted, Lorquas Ptomel sig


naled me to advance, and, fixing his great, 
hideous eyes upon me, addressed me thus : 

" You have been with us a few days, yet during 
that time you have by your prowess won a high 
position among us. Be that as it may, you are not 
one of us ; you owe us no allegiance. 

"Your position is a peculiar one," he con 
tinued ; " you are a prisoner and yet you give com 
mands which must be obeyed; you are an alien 
and yet you are a Tharkian chieftain; you are a 
midget and yet you can kill a mighty warrior with 
one blow of your fist. And now you are reported 
to have been plotting to escape with another 
prisoner of another race; a prisoner who, from 
her own admission, half believes you are returned 
from the valley of Dor. Either one of these accu 
sations, if proved, would be sufficient grounds for 
your execution, but we are a just people and you 
shall have a trial on our return to Thark, if Tal 
Hajus so commands. 

[118] 



A PRISONER WITH POWER 

" But," he continued, In his fierce guttural tones, 
" if you run off with the red girl it is I who shall 
have to account to Tal Hajus; it is I who shall 
have to face Tars Tarkas, and either demonstrate 
my right to command, or the metal from my dead 
carcass will go to a better man, for such is the 
custom of the Tharks. 

" I have no quarrel with Tars Tarkas ; together 
we rule supreme the greatest of the lesser com 
munities among the green men; we do not wish 
to fight between ourselves; and so if you were 
dead, John Carter, I should be glad. Under two 
conditions only, however, may you be killed by 
us without orders from Tal Hajus; in personal 
combat in self-defense, should you attack one of 
us, or were you apprehended in an attempt to 
escape. 

" As a matter of justice I must warn you that 
we only await one of these two excuses for ridding 
ourselves of so great a responsibility. The safe 
delivery of the red girl to Tal Hajus is of the 
greatest importance. Not in a thousand years 
have the Tharks made such a capture; she is the 
granddaughter of the greatest of the red jeddaks, 
who is also our bitterest enemy. I have spoken. 
The red girl told us that we were without the 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



softer sentiments of humanity, but we are a just 
and truthful race. You may go." 

Turning, I left the audience chamber. So this 
was the beginning of Sarkoja's persecution I I 
knew that none other could be responsible for this 
report which had reached the ears of Lorquas 
Ptomel so quickly, and now I recalled those por 
tions of our conversation which had touched upon 
escape and upon my origin. 

Sarkoja was at this time Tars Tarkas' oldest 
and most trusted female. As such she was a 
mighty power behind the throne, for no warrior 
had the confidence of Lorquas Ptomel to such an 
extent as did his ablest lieutenant, Tars Tarkas. 

However, instead of putting thoughts of pos 
sible escape from my mind, my audience with 
Lorquas Ptomel only served to center my every 
faculty on this subject. Now, more than before, 
the absolute necessity for escape, in so far as Dejah 
Thoris was concerned, was impressed upon me, 
for I was convinced that some horrible fate 
awaited her at the headquarters of Tal Hajus. 

As described by Sola, this monster was the 

exaggerated personification of all the ages of 

cruelty, ferocity, and brutality from which he had 

descended. Cold, cunning, calculating; he was, 

[120] 



A PRISONER WITH POWER 

also, in marked contrast to most of his fellows,a slave to that brute passion which the waning 
demands for procreation upon their dying planet 
has almost stilled in the Martian breast. 

The thought that the divine Dejah Thoris might 
fall into the clutches of such an abysmal atavism 
started the cold sweat upon me. Far better that 
we save friendly bullets for ourselves at the last 
moment, as did those brave frontier women of my 
lost land, who took their own lives rather than fall 
into the hands of the Indian braves. 

As I wandered about the plaza lost in my 
gloomy forebodings Tars Tarkas approached me 
on his way from the audience chamber. His 
demeanor toward me was unchanged, and he 
greeted me as though we had not just parted a few 
moments before. 

"Where are your quarters, John Carter?" he 
asked. 

" I have selected none," I replied. " It seemed 
best that I quartered either by myself or among 
the other warriors, and I was awaiting an oppor 
tunity to ask your advice. As you know," and I 
smiled, " I am not yet familiar with all the customs 
of the Tharks." 

" Come with me," he directed, and together 
[121] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



we moved off across the plaza to a building which 
I was glad to see adjoined that occupied by Sola 
and her charges. 

" My quarters are on the first floor of this build 
ing," he said, "and the second floor also is fully 
occupied by warriors, but the third floor and the 
floors above are vacant; you may take your choice 
of these. 

"I understand," he continued, "that you have 
given up your woman to the red prisoner. Well, 
as you have said, your ways are not our ways, 
but you can fight well enough to do about as you 
please, and so, if you wish to give your woman to 
a captive, it is your own affair; but as a chieftain 
you should have those to serve you, and in 
.accordance with our customs you may select any 
or all the females from the retinues of the chief 
tains whose metal you now wear." 

I thanked him, but assured him that I could get 
along very nicely without assistance except in the 
matter of preparing food, and so he promised to 
send women to me for this purpose and also for 
the care of my arms and the manufacture of my 
ammunition, which he said would be necessary. I 
suggested that they might also bring some of the 
sleeping silks and furs which belonged to me as 
[122] 



A PRISONER WITH POWER 

spoils of combat, for the nights were cold and I 
had none of my own. 

He promised to do so, and departed. Left 
alone, I ascended the winding corridor to the upper 
floors in search of suitable quarters. The beauties 
of the other buildings were repeated in this, and, 
as usual, I was soon lost in a tour of investigation 
and discovery. 

I finally chose a front room on the third floor, 
because this brought me nearer to Dejah Thoris, 
whose apartment was on the second floor of the 
adjoining building, and it flashed upon me that 
I could rig up some means of communication 
whereby she might signal me in case she needed 
either my services or my protection. 

Adjoining my sleeping apartment were baths, 
dressing rooms, and other sleeping and living 
apartments, in all some ten rooms on this floor. 
The windows of the back rooms overlooked an 
enormous court, which formed the center of the 
square made by the buildings which faced the four 
contiguous streets, and which was now given over 
to the quartering of the various animals belonging 
to the warriors occupying the adjoining buildings. 

While the court was entirely overgrown with 
the yellow, moss-like vegetation which blankets 
[123] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



practically the entire surface of Mars, yet numer 
ous fountains, statuary, benches, and pergola-like 
contraptions bore witness to the beauty which the 
court must have presented in bygone times, when 
graced by the fair-haired, laughing people whom 
stern and unalterable cosmic laws had driven not 
only from their homes, but from all except the 
vague legends of their descendants. 

One could easily picture the gorgeous foliage 
of the luxuriant Martian vegetation which once 
filled this scene with life and color; the graceful 
figures of the beautiful women, the straight and 
handsome men ; the happy frolicking children all 
sunlight, happiness and peace. It was difficult to 
realize that they had gone; down through ages 
of darkness, cruelty, and ignorance, until their 
hereditary instincts of culture and humanitarianism 
had risen ascendant once more in the final com 
posite race which now is dominant upon Mars. 

My thoughts were cut short by the advent of 
several young females bearing loads of weapons, 
silks, furs, jewels, cooking utensils, and casks of 
food and drink, including considerable loot from 
the air craft. All this, it seemed, had been the 
property of the two chieftains I had slain, and 
now, by the customs of the Tharks, it had become 



A PRISONER WITH POWER 

mine. At my direction they placed the stuff in 
one of the back rooms, and then departed, only 
to return with a second load, which they advised 
me constituted the balance of my goods. On the 
second trip they were accompanied by ten or fifteen 
other women and youths, who, it seemed, formed 
the retinues of the two chieftains. 

They were not their families, nor their wives, 
nor their servants; the relationship was peculiar, 
and so unlike anything known to us that it is most 
difficult to describe. All property among the green 
Martians is owned in common by the community, 
except the personal weapons, ornaments and sleep 
ing silks and furs of the individuals. These alone 
can one claim undisputed right to, nor may he 
accumulate more of these than are required for his 
actual needs. The surplus he holds merely as cus 
todian, and it is passed on to the younger members 
of the community as necessity demands. 

The women and children of a man's retinue 
may be likened to a military unit for which he is 
responsible in various ways, as in matters of 
instruction, discipline, sustenance, and the exigen 
cies of their continual roamings and their unending 
strife with other communities and with the red 
Martians. His women are in no sense wives. 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



The green Martians use no word corresponding 
in meaning with this earthly word. Their mating 
i a matter of community interest solely, and is 
directed without reference to natural selection. 
The council of chieftains of each community 
control the matter as surely as the owner of a 
Kentucky racing stud directs the scientific breed 
ing of his stock for the improvement of the whole. 

In theory it may sound well, as is often the case 
with theories, but the results of ages of this 
unnatural practice, coupled with the community 
interest in the offspring being held paramount to 
that of the mother, is shown in the cold, cruel 
creatures, and their gloomy, loveless, mirthless 
existence. 

It is true that the green Martians are absolutely 
virtuous, both men and women, with the exception 
of such degenerates as Tal Hajus; but better far 
a finer balance of human characteristics even at 
the expense of a slight and occasional loss of 
chastity. 

Finding that I must assume responsibility for 
these creatures, whether I would or not, I made 
the best of it and directed them to find quarters 
on the upper floors, leaving the third floor to me. 
.One of the girls I charged with the duties of my 



A PRISONER WITH POWER 

simple cuisine, and directed the others to take up 
the various activities which had formerly con 
stituted their vocations. Thereafter I saw little 
of them, nor did I care to. 

\ 



[127] 



F 



CHAPTER XIII 

LOVE-MAKING ON MARS 

OLLOWING the battle with the air ships, 
the community remained within the city for 
several days, abandoning the homeward march 
until they could feel reasonably assured that the 
ships would not return; for to be caught on the 
open plains with a cavalcade of chariots and chil 
dren was far from the desire of even so warlike a 
people as the green Martians. 

During our period of inactivity, Tars Tarkas 
had instructed me in many of the customs and arts 
of war familiar to the Tharks, including lessons in 
riding and guiding the great beasts which bore the 
warriors. These creatures, which are known as 
thoats, are as dangerous and vicious as their 
masters, but when once subdued are sufficiently 
tractable for the purposes of the green Martians. 

Two of these animals had fallen to me from 
the warriors whose metal I wore, and in a short 
time I could handle them quite as well as the native 
warriors. The method was not at all complicated. 



LOVE-MAKING ON MARS 

If the thoats did not respond with sufficient celerity 
to the telepathic instructions of their riders they 
were dealt a terrific blow between the ears with 
the butt of a pistol, and if they showed fight this 
treatment was continued until the brutes either 
were subdued, or had unseated their riders. 

In the latter case it became a life and death 
struggle between the man and the beast. If the 
former were quick enough with his pistol he might 
live to ride again, though upon some other beast; 
if not, his torn and mangled body was gathered up 
by his women and burned in accordance with Tharkian custom. 

My experience with Woola determined me to 
attempt the experiment of kindness in my treat 
ment of my tho-ats. First I taught them that they 
could not unseat me, and even rapped them sharply 
between the ears to impress upon them my author, 
jty and mastery. Then, by degrees, I won their 
confidence in much the same manner as I had 
adopted countless times with my many mundane 
mounts. I was ever a good hand with animals, 
and by inclination, as well as because it brought 
more lasting and satisfactory results, I was always 
kind and humane in my dealings with the lower 
Orders, I could take a human life, if necessary, 
[129] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



with far less compunction than that of a poor, 
unreasoning, irresponsible brute. 

In the course of a few days my thoats were the 
wonder of the entire community. They would 
follow me like dogs, rubbing their great snouts 
against my body in awkward evidence of affection, 
and respond to my every command with an alacrity 
and docility which caused the Martian warriors 
to ascribe to me the possession of some earthly 
power unknown on Mars. 

" How have you bewitched them? " asked Tars 
Tarkas one afternoon, when he had seen me run 
my arm far between the great jaws of one of 
my thoats which had wedged a piece of stone 
between two of his teeth while feeding upon the 
moss-like vegetation within our court yard. 

"By kindness," I replied. "You see, Tars 
Tarkas, the softer sentiments have their value, 
even to a warrior. In the height of battle as well 
as upon the march I know that my thoats will 
obey my every command, and therefore my fight-, 
ing efficiency is enhanced, and I am a better war 
rior for the reason that I am a kind master. Your 
other warriors would find it to the advantage of 
themselves as well as of the community to adopt 
my methods in this respect. Only a few days since 



LOVE-MAKING ON MARS 

you, yourself, told me that these great brutes, by 
the uncertainty of their tempers, often were the 
means of turning victory into defeat, since, at a 
crucial moment, they might elect to unseat and rend 
their riders." 

" Show me how you accomplish these results," 
was Tars Tarkas' only rejoinder. 

And so I explained as carefully as I could the 
entire method of training I had adopted with my 
beasts, and later he had me repeat it before Lorquas Ptomel and the assembled warriors. That 
moment marked the beginning of a new existence 
for the poor thoats, and before I left the com 
munity of Lorquas Ptomel I had the satisfaction 
of observing a regiment of as tractable and docile 
mounts as one might care to see. The effect on 
the precision and celerity of the military move 
ments was so remarkable that Lorquas Ptomel 
presented me with a massive anklet of gold from 
his own leg, as a sign of his appreciation of my 
service to the horde. 

On the seventh day following the battle with 
the air craft we again took up the march toward 
Thark, all probability of another attack being 
deemed remote by Lorquas Ptomel. 

During the days just preceding our departure 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



I had seen but little of Dejah Thoris, as I had 
been kept very busy by Tars Tarkas with my les 
sons in the art of Martian warfare, as well as in 
the training of my thoats. The few times I had 
visited her quarters she had been absent, walking 
upon the streets with Sola, or investigating the 
buildings in the near vicinity of the Plaza. I had 
warned them against venturing far from the plaza 
for fear of the great white apes, whose ferocity 
I was only too well acquainted with. However, 
since Woola accompanied them on all their excur 
sions, and as Sola was well armed, there was com 
paratively little cause for fear. 

On the evening before our departure I saw them 
approaching along one of the great avenues which 
lead into the plaza from the east. I advanced to 
meet them, and telling Sola that I would take the 
responsibility for Dejah Thoris' safe keeping, I 
directed her to return to her quarters on some 
trivial errand. I liked and trusted Sola, but for 
some reason I desired to be alone with Dejah 
Thoris, who represented to me all that I had left 
behind upon Earth in agreeable and congenial 
companionship. There seemed bonds of mutual 
interest between us as powerful as though we had 
been born under the same roof rather than upon 



LOVE-MAKING ON MARS 

different planets, hurtling through space some 
forty-eight million miles apart. 

That she shared my sentiments in this respect 
I was positive, for on my approach the look of 
pitiful hopelessness left her sweet countenance to 
be replaced by a smile of joyful welcome, as she 
placed her little right hand upon my left shoulder 
in true red Martian salute. 

" Sarkoja told Sola that you had become a true 
Thark," she said, "and that I would now see no 
more of you than of any of the other warriors." 

"Sarkoja is a liar of the first magnitude," I 
replied, "notwithstanding the proud claim of the 
Tharks to absolute verity." 

Dejah Thoris laughed. 

" I knew that even though you became a member 
of the community you would not cease to be my 
friend ; A warrior may change his metal, but not 
his heart, 7 as the saying is upon Barsoom. 

"I think they have been trying to keep us 
apart," she continued, "for whenever you have 
been off duty one of the older women of Tars 
Tarkas' retinue has always arranged to trump up 
some excuse to get Sola and me out of sight. They 
have had me down in the pits below the buildings 
helping them mix their awful radium powder, and 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



make their terrible projectiles. You know that 
these have to be manufactured by artificial light, 
as exposure to sunlight always results in an explo 
sion. You have noticed that their bullets explode 
when they strike an object? Well, the opaque, 
outer coating is broken by the impact, exposing a 
glass cylinder, almost solid, in the forward end of 
which is a minute particle of radium powder. The 
moment the sunlight, even though diffused, strikes 
this powder it explodes with a violence which 
nothing can withstand. If you ever witness a 
night battle you will note the absence of these 
explosions, while the morning following the battle 
will be filled at sunrise with the sharp detonations 
of exploding missiles fired the preceding night. 
As a rule, however, non-exploding projectiles are 
used at night." l 

While I was much interested in Dejah Thoris' 
explanation of this wonderful adjunct to Martian 
warfare, I was more concerned by the immediate 
problem of their treatment of her. That they 
were keeping her away from me was not a matter 

1 1 have used (he word radium in describing this powder 
because in the light of recent discoveries on Earth I believe it 
to be a mixture of which radium is the base. In Captain Carter's 
manuscript it is mentioned always by the name used in the written 
language of Helium and is spelled in hieroglyphics which it 
would be difficult and useless to reproduce. 

[134] 



LOVE-MAKING ON MARS 

for surprise, but that they should subject her to 
dangerous and arduous labor filled me with rage. 

"Have they ever subjected you to cruelty and 
ignominy, Dejah Thoris?" I asked, feeling the 
hot blood of my fighting ancestors leap in my veins 
as I awaited her reply. 

"Only in little ways, John Carter," she 
answered. "Nothing that can harm me outside 
my pride. They know that I am the daughter of 
ten thousand jeddaks, that I trace my ancestry 
straight back without a break to the builder of 
the first great waterway, and they, who do not even 
know their own mothers, are jealous of me. At 
heart they hate their horrid fates, and so wreak 
their poor spite on me who stand for everything 
they have not, and for all they most crave and 
never can attain. Let us pity them, my chieftain, 
for even though we die at their hands we can 
afford them pity, since we are greater than they 
and they know it." 

Had I known the significance of those words 
"my chieftain," as applied by a red Martian 
woman to a man, I should have had the surprise 
of my life, but I did not know at that time, nor 
for many months thereafter. Yes, I still had 
much to learn upon Barsoom. 

[135] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



" I presume it is the better part of wisdom that 
we bow to our fate with as good grace as pos 
sible, Dejah Thoris; but I hope, nevertheless, that 
I may be present the next time that any Martian, 
green, red, pink, or violet, has the temerity to 
even so much as frown on you, my princess." 

Dejah Thoris caught her breath at my last 
words, and gazed upon me with dilated eyes and 
quickening breath, and then, with an odd little 
laugh, which brought roguish dimples to the cor 
ners of her mouth, she shook her head and cried: 

"What a child! A great warrior and yet a 
stumbling little child." 

"What have I done now?" I asked, in sore 
perplexity. 

"Some day you shall know, John Carter, if we 
live ; but I may not tell you. And I, the daughter 
of Mors Kajak, son of Tardos Mors, have listened 
without anger," she soliloquized in conclusion. 

Then she broke out again into one of her gay, 
happy, laughing moods; joking with me on my 
prowess as a Thark warrior as co-ntrasted with 
my soft heart and natural kindliness. 

" I presume that should you accidentally wound 
an enemy you would take him home and nurse him 
back to health," she laughed. 
[136] 



LOVE-MAKING ON MARS 

"That is precisely what we do on Earth," I 
answered. "At least among civilized men." 

This made her laugh again. She could not 
understand it, for, with all her tenderness and 
womanly sweetness, she was still a Martian, and 
to a Martian the only good enemy is a dead enemy; 
for every dead foeman means so much more to 
divide between those who live. 

I was very curious to know what I had said or 
done to cause her so much perturbation a moment 
before and so I continued to importune her to 
enlighten me. 

"No," she exclaimed, "it is enough that you 
have said it and that I have listened. And when 
you learn, John Carter, and if I be dead, as likely 
enough I shall be ere the further moon has circled 
Barsoom another twelve times, remember that I 
listened and that I smiled." 

It was all Greek to me, but the more I begged 
her to explain the more positive became her 
denials of my request, and, so, in very hopeless 
ness, I desisted. 

Day had now given away to night and as we 

wandered along the great avenue lighted by the 

two moons of Barsoom, and with Earth looking 

down upon us out of her luminous green eye, it 

[137] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



seemed that we were alone in the universe, and I, 
at least, was content that it should be so. 

The chill of the Martian night was upon us, 
and removing my silks I threw them across the 
shoulders of Dejah Thoris. As my arm rested 
for an instant upon her I felt a thrill pass through 
every fiber of my being such as contact with no 
other mortal had even produced; and it seemed to 
me that she had leaned slightly toward me, but 
of that I was not sure. Only I knew that as my 
arm rested there across her shoulders longer than 
the act of adjusting the silk required she did not 
draw away, nor did she speak. And so, in silence, 
we walked the surface of a dying world, but in 
the breast of one of us at least had been born that 
which is ever oldest, yet ever new. 

I loved Dejah Thoris. The touch of my arm 
upon her naked shoulder had spoken to me in 
words I could not mistake, and I knew that I had 
loved her since the first moment that my eyes had 

met hers that first time in the plaza of the dead 
I 

city of Korad. 




I SOUGHT OUT DEJAH THORIS IN THE THRONG OF DEPARTING 



CHARIOTS. 



Page 142 



M 



CHAPTER XIV 

A DUEL TO THE DEATH 

Y first impulse was to tell her of my love, 
and then I thought of the helplessness of 
her position wherein I alone could lighten the 
burdens of her captivity, and protect her in my 
poor way against the thousands of hereditary ene 
mies she must face upon our arrival at Thark. I 
could not chance causing her additional pain or 
sorrow by declaring a love which, in all probability 
she oHd not return. Should I be so indiscreet, her 
position would be even more unbearable than now, 
and the thought that she might feel that I was 
taking advantage of her helplessness, to influence 
her decision was the final argument which sealed 
my lips. 

"Why are you so quiet, Dejah Thoris?" I 
asked. " Possibly you would rather return to Sola 
and your quarters." 

"No," she murmured, "I am happy here. I 
do not know why it is that I should always be 
happy and contented when you, John Carter, a 
[139] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



stranger, are with me; yet at such times it seems 
that I am safe and that, with you, I shall soon 
return to my father's court and feel his strong 
arms about me and my mother's tears and kisses 
on my cheek." 

"Do people kiss, then, upon Barsoom?" I 
asked, when she had explained the word she used, 
in answer to my inquiry as to its meaning. 

"Parents, brothers, and sisters, yes; and," she 
added in a low, thoughtful tone, " lovers." 

"And you, Dejah Thoris, have parents and 
brothers and sisters?" 

"Yes." 

"And a lover?" 

She was silent, nor could I venture to repeat 
the question. 

"The man of Barsoom," she finally ventured, 
" does not ask personal questions of women, except 
his mother, and the woman he has fought for and 
won." 

"But I have fought " I started, and then I 
wished my tongue had been cut from my mouth; 
for she turned even as I caught myself and ceased, 
and drawing my silks from her shoulder she held 
them out to me, and without a word, and with head 
held high, she moved with the carriage of the 
[140] 



A DUEL TO THE DEATH 

queen she was toward the plaza and the doorway 
of her quarters. 

I did not attempt to follow her, other than to 
y see that she reached the building in safety, but, 
directing Woola to accompany her, I turned dis 
consolately and entered my own house. I sat for 
hours cross-legged, and cross-tempered, upon my 
silks meditating upon the queer freaks chance plays 
upon us poor devils of mortals. 

So this was love ! I had escaped it for all the 
years I had roamed the five continents and their 
encircling seas; in spite of beautfful women and 
urging opportunity; in spite of a half-desire for 
love and a constant search for my ideal, it had 
remained for me to fall furiously and hopelessly 
in love with a creature from another world, of a 
species similar possibly, yet not identical with mine. 
[A. woman who was hatched from an egg, and 
whose span of life might cover a thousand years; 
whose people had strange customs and ideas; a 
woman whose hopes, whose pleasures, whose 
standards of virtue and of right and wrong might 
vary as greatly from mine as did those of the 
green Martians. 

Yes, I was a fool, but I was in love, and though 
I was suffering the greatest misery I had ever 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



known I would not have had it otherwise for all 
the riches of Barsoom, Such is love, and such 
are lovers wherever love is known. 

To me, Dejah Thoris was all that was perfect; 
all that was virtuous and beautiful and noble 
and good. I believed that from the bottom of 
my heart, from the depth of my soul on that night 
in Korad as I sat cross-legged upon my silks while 
the nearer moon of Barsoom raced through the 
western sky toward the horizon, and lighted up 
the gold and marble, and jeweled mosaics of my 
world-old chamber, and I believe it today as I sit 
at my desk in the little study overlooking the Hud 
son. Twenty years have intervened; for ten of 
them I lived and fought for Dejah Thoris and 
her people, and for ten I have lived upon her mem 
ory. 

The morning of our departure for Thark 
dawned clear and hot, as do all Martian morn- 1 
ings except for the six weeks when the snow melts 
at the poles. 

I sought out Dejah Thoris in the throng of 
departing chariots, but she turned her shoulder to 
me, and I could see the red blood mount to her 
cheek. With the foolish inconsistency of love I 
held my peace when I might have plead ignorance 



A DUEL TO THE DEATH 

of the nature of my offense, or at least the gravity 
oT it, and so have effected, at worst, a half con 
ciliation. 

My duty dictated that I must see that she was 
comfortable, and so I glanced into her chariot and 
rearranged her silks and furs. In doing so I noted 
with horror that she was heavily chained by one 
ankle to the side of the vehicle. 

"What does this mean?" I cried, turning to 
Sola. 

"Sarkoja thought it best," she answered, her 
face betokening her disapproval of the procedure. 

Examining the manacles I saw that they fastened 
with a massive spring lock. 

" Where is the key, Sola ? Let me have it." 

"Sarkoja wears it, John Carter," she answered. 

I turned without further word and sought out 
Tars Tarkas, to whom I vehemently objected to 
the unnecessary humiliations and cruelties, as they 
seemed to my lover's eyes, that were being heaped 
upon Dejah Thoris. 

I "John Carter," he answered, "if ever you and 
Dejah Thoris escape the Tharks it will be upon 
this journey. We know that you will not go with 
out her. You _have shown yourself a mighty 
fighter, and we do not wish to manacle you, so we 

[143] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



hold you both in the easiest way that will yet 
ensure security. I have spoken." 

I saw the strength of his reasoning at a flash, 
and knew that it were futile to appeal from his 
decision, but I asked that the key be taken from 
Sarkoja and that she be directed to leave the 
prisoner alone in future. 

"This much, Tars Tarkas, you may do for me 
in return for the friendship that, I must confess, 
I feel for you." 

"Friendship?" he replied. "There is no such 
thing, John Carter; but have your will. I shall 
direct that Sarkoja cease to annoy the girl, and I 
myself will take the custody of the key." 

"Unless you wish me to assume the respon 
sibility," I said, smiling. 

He looked at me long and earnestly before he 
spoke. 

u Were you to give me your word that neither 
you nor Dejah Thoris would attempt to escape 
until after we have safely reached the court of 
Tal Hajus you might have the key and throw the 
chains into the river Iss." 

"It were better that you held the key, Tars 
Tarkas," I replied. 

He smiled, and said no more, buf that night 
[144] 



A DUEL TO THE DEATH 

as we were making camp I saw him unfasten 
Dejah Thoris' fetters himself. 

With all his cruel ferocity and coldness there 
was an undercurrent of something in Tars Tarkas 
which he seemed ever battling to subdue. Could 
it be a vestige of some human instinct come back 
from an ancient forbear to haunt him with the 
horror of his people's ways ! 

As I was approaching Dejah Thoris' chariot I 
passed Sarkoja, and the black, venomous look she 
accorded me was the sweetest balm I had felt for 
many hours. Lord, how she hated me ! It bristled 
from her so palpably that one might almost have 
cut it with a sword. 

A few moments later I saw her deep in conver 
sation with a warrior named Zad; a big, hulking, 
powerful brute, but one who had never made a 
kill among his own chieftains, and so was still 
an o mad, or man with one name; he could win 
a second name only with the metal of some chief 
tain. It was this custom which entitled me to the 
names of either of the chieftains I had killed; in 
fact, some of the warriors addressed me as Dotar 
Sojat, a combination of the surnames of the two 
warrior chieftains whose metal I had taken, or, 
in other wo'rds, whom I had slain in fair fight 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



As Sarkoja talked with Zad he cast occasional 
glances in my direction, while she seemed to be 
urging him very strongly to some action. I paid 
little attention to it at the time, but the next day 
I had good reason to recall the circumstances, and 
at the same time gain a slight insight into the 
depths of Sarkoja's hatred and the lengths to 
which she was capable of going to wreak her horrid 
vengeance on me. 

Dejah Thoris would have none of me again 
on this evening, and though I spoke her name she 
neither replied, nor conceded by so much as the 
flutter of an eyelid that she realized my existence. 
In my extremity I did what most other lovers would 
have done ; I sought word from her through an inti 
mate. In this instance it was Sola whom I inter 
cepted in another part of camp. 

"What is the matter with Dejah Thoris?" I 
blurted out at her. "Why will she not speak 
tome?" 

Sola stemed puzzled herself, as though such 
strange actions on the part of two humans were 
quite beyond her, as indeed they were, poor child. 

"She says you have angered her, and that is 
all she will say, except that she is the daughter of 
a jed and the granddaughter of a jeddak and she 



A DUEL TO THE DEATH 

has been humiliated by a creature who could not 
polish the teeth of her grandmother's sorak." 

I pondered over this report for some time, finally 
asking, 

" What might a sorak be, Sola ? " 

" A little animal about as big as my hand, which 
the red Martian women keep to play with," ex 
plained Sola. 

Not fit to polish the teeth of her grandmother's 
cat I I must rank pretty low in the consideration 
of Dejah Thoris, I thought; but I could not help 
laughing at the strange figure of speech, so homely 
and in this respect so earthly. It made me home 
sick, for it sounded very much like "not fit to 
polish her shoes." And then commenced a train 
of thought quite new to me. I began to wonder 
what my people at home were doing. I had not 
seen them for years. There was a family of Car 
ters in Virginia who claimed close relationship 
with me; I was supposed to be a great uncle, or 
something of the kind equally foolish. I could 
pass anywhere for twenty-five to thirty years of 
age, and to be a great uncle always seemed the 
height of incongruity, for my thoughts and feel 
ings were those of a boy. There were two little 
kiddies in the Carter family whom I had loved and 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



who had thought there was no one on Earth like 
Uncle Jack; I could see them just as plainly, as I 
stood there under the moonlit 'skies of Barsoom, 
and I longed for them as I had never longed for 
any mortals before. By nature a wanderer, I had 
never known the true meaning of the word home, 
but the great hall of the Carters had always stood 
for all that the word did mean to me, and now 
my heart turned toward it from the cold and 
unfriendly peoples I had been thrown amongst. 
For did not even Dejah Thoris despise me-! I 
was a low creature, so low in fact that I was not 
even fit to polish the teeth of her grandmother's 
cat; and then my saving sense of humor came to 
my rescue, and laughing I turned into my silks 
and furs and slept upon the moon-haunted ground 
the sleep of a tired and healthy fighting man. 

We broke camp the next day at an early hour 
and marched with only a single halt until just 
before dark. Two incidents broke the tediousness of the march. About noon we espied far to 
our right what was evidently an incubator, and 
Lorquas Ptomel directed Tars Tarkas to investi 
gate it. The latter took a dozen warriors, includ 
ing myself, and we raced across the vdvety car 
peting of moss to the little enclosure. 
[148] 



A DUEL TO THE DEATH 

It was indeed an incubator, but the eggs were 
very small in comparison with those I had seen 
hatching in ours at the time of my arrival on Mars. 

Tars Tarkas dismounted and examined the 
inclosure minutely, finally announcing that it 
belonged to the green men of Warhoon and that 
the cement was scarcely dry where it had been 
walled up. 

" They cannot be a day's march ahead of us," 
he exclaimed, the light of battle leaping to his 
fierce face. 

The work at the incubator was short indeed. 
The warriors tore open the entrance and a couple 
of them, crawling in, soon demolished all the eggs 
with their short-swords. Then remounting we 
dashed back to join the cavalcade. During the 
ride I took occasion to ask Tars Tarkas if these 
Warhoons whose eggs we had destroyed were a 
smaller people than his Tharks. 

" I noticed that their eggs were so much smaller 
than those I saw hatching in your incubator," I 
added. 

He explained that the eggs had just been placed 
there ; but, like all green Martian eggs, they would 
grow during the five-year period of incubation 
until they obtained the size of those I had seen 

CH9] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



hatching on the day of my arrival on Barsoom. 
This was indeed an interesting piece of informa 
tion, for it had always seemed remarkable to me 
that the green Martian women, large as they were, 
could bring forth such enormous eggs as I had 
seen the four-foot infants emerging from. As a 
matter of fact, the new-laid egg is but little larger 
than an ordinary goose egg, and as it does not 
commence to grow until subjected to the light of 
the sun the chieftains have little difficulty in trans 
porting several hundreds of them at one time from 
the storage vaults to the incubators. 

Shortly after the incident of the Warhoon eggs 
we halted to rest the animals, and it was during 
this halt that the second of the day's interesting 
episodes occurred. I was engaged in changing 
my riding cloths from one of my thoats to the 
other, for I divided the day's work between them, 
when Zad approached me, and without a word 
struck my animal a terrific blow with his longsword. 

I did not need a manual of green Martian eti 
quette to know what reply to make, for, in fact, 
I was so wild with anger that I could scarcely 
refrain from drawing my pistol and shooting him 
down for the brute he was ; but he stood waiting 



A DUEL TO THE DEATH 

with drawn long-sword, and my only choice was 
to draw my own and meet him in fair fight with 
his choice of weapons or a lesser one. 

This latter alternative is always permissible, 
therefore I could have used my short-sword, my 
dagger, my hatchet, or my fists had I wished, and 
been entirely within my rights, but I could not use 
fire arms or a .ipear while he held only his longsword. 

I chose the same weapon he had drawn because 
I knew he prided himself upon his ability with it, 
and I wished, if I worsted him at all, to do it with 
his own weapon. The fight that followed was a 
long one and delayed the resumption of the march 
for an hour. The entire community surrounded 
us, leaving a clear space about one hundred feet 
in diameter for our battle. 

Zad first attempted to rush me down as a bull 
might a wolf, but I was much too quick for him, 
and each time I side-stepped his rushes he would 
go lunging past me, only to receive a nick from 
my sword upon his arm or back. He was soon 
streaming blood from a half dozen minor wounds, 
but I could not obtain an opening to deliver an 
effective thrust. Then he changed his tactics, and 
fighting warily and with extreme dexterity, he 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



tried to do by science what he was unable to do 
by brute strength. I must admit that he was a 
magnificent swordsman, and had it not been for 
my greater endurance and the remarkable agility 
the lesser gravitation of Mars lent me I might not 
have been able to put up the creditable fight I did 
against him. 

We circled for some time without doing much 
damage on either side; the long, straight, needlelike swords flashing in the sunlight, and ringing out 
upon the stillness as they crashed together with 
each effective parry. Finally Zad, realizing that 
he was tiring more than I, evidently decided to 
close in and end the battle in a final blaze of glory 
for himself; just as he rushed me a blinding flash 
of light struck full in my eyes, so that I could 
not see his approach and could only leap blindly 
to one side in an effort to escape the mighty blade 
that it seemed I could already feel in my vitals. 
I was only partially successful, as a sharp pain in 
my left shoulder attested, but in the sweep of my 
glance as I sought to again locate my adversary, 
a sight met my astonished gaze which paid me well 
for the wound the temporary blindness had caused 
me. There, upon Dejah Thoris' chariot stood 
three figures, for the purpose evidently of wit


nessing the encounter above the heads of the 
intervening Tharks. There were Dejah Thoris, 
Sola, and Sarkoja, and as my fleeting glance swept 
over them a little tableau was presented which 
will stand graven in my memory to the day of my 
death. 

As I looked, Dejah Thoris turned upon Sarkoja 
with the fury of a young tigress and struck some 
thing from her upraised hand; something which 
flashed in the sunlight as it spun to the 
ground. Then I knew what had blinded me 
at that crucial moment of the fight, and how 
Sarkoja had found a way to kill me wit 
out herself delivering the final thrust. Another 
thing I saw, too, which almost lost my life for 
me then and there, for it took my mind for the 
fraction of an instant entirely from my antagonist; 
for, as Dejah Thoris struck the tiny mirror from 
her hand, Sarkoja, her face livid with hatred and 
baffled rage, whipped out her dagger and aimed a 
terrific blow at Dejah Thoris; and then Sola, our 
dear and faithful Sola, sprang between them ; the 
last I saw was the great knife descending upon 
her shielding breast. 

My enemy had recovered from his thrust and 
was making it extremely interesting for me, so I 

[153] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



reluctantly gave my attention to the work in hand, 
but my mind was not upon the battle. 

We rushed each other furiously time after time, 
'til suddenly, feeling the sharp point of his sword 
at my breast in a thrust I could neither parry nor 
escape, I threw myself upon him with outstretched 
sword and with all the weight of my body, deter 
mined that I would not die alone if I could pre 
vent it. I felt the steel tear into my chest, all 
went black before me, my head whirled in d iness, and I felt my knees giving beneath me. 



w 



CHAPTER XV 

SOLA TELLS ME HER STORY 

HEN consciousness returned, and, as I 
soon learned, I was down but a moment, I 
sprang quickly to my feet searching for my sword, 
and there I found it, buried to the hilt in the green 
breast of Zad, who lay stone dead upon the ochre 
moss of the ancient sea bottom. As I regained 
my full senses I found his weapon piercing my 
left breast, but only through the flesh and muscles 
which cover my ribs, entering near the center of 
my chest and coming out below the shoulder. As 
I had lunged I had turned so that his sword merely 
passed beneath the muscles, inflicting a painful 
but not dangerous wound. 

Removing the blade from my body I also 
regained my own, and turning my back upon his 
ugly carcass, I moved, sick, sore, and disgusted, 
toward the chariots which bore my retinue and my 
belongings. A murmur of Martian applause 
greeted me, but I cared not for it. 

Bleeding and weak I reached my women, who, 

[155] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



accustomed to such happenings, dressed my 
wounds, applying the wonderful healing and 
remedial agents which make only the most instan 
taneous of death blows fatal. Give a Martian 
woman a chance and death must take a back seat. 
They soon had me patched up so that, except for 
weakness from loss of blood and a little sore 
ness around the wound, I suffered no great dis 
tress from this thrust which, under earthly treat 
ment, undoubtedly would have put me flat on my 
back for days. 

As soon as they were through with me 
I hastened to the chariot of Dejah Thoris, where 
I found my poor Sola with her chest swathed in 
bandages, but apparently little the worse for her 
encounter with Sarkoja, whose dagger it seemed 
had struck the edge of one of Sola's metal breast 
ornaments and, thus deflected, had inflicted but i 
slight flesh wound. 

As I approached I found Dejah Thoris lying 
prone upon her silks and furs, her lithe form 
wracked with sobs. She did not notice my pres 
ence, nor did she hear me speaking with Sola, who 
was standing a short distance from the vehicle. 

"Is she injured?" I asked of Sola, indicating 
Dejah Thoris by an inclination of my head. 



SOLA TELLS ME HER STORY 

"No," she answered, "she thinks that you are 
dead." 

"And that her grandmother's cat may now 
have no one to polish its teeth?" I queried, smil 
ing. 

"I think you wrong her, John Carter," said 
Sola. "I do not understand either her ways or 
yours, but I am sure the granddaughter of ten thou 
sand jeddaks would never grieve like this over the 
death of one she considered beneath her, or indeed 
over any who held but the highest claim upon her 
affections. They are a proud race, but they are 
just, as are all Barsoomians, and you must have 
hurt or wronged her grievously that she will not 
admit your existence living, though she mourns 
you dead. 

"Tears are a strange sight upon Barsoom," 

ishe continued, "and so it is difficult for me to 

interpret them. I have seen but two people weep 

in all my life, other than Dejah Thoris; one wept 

' from sorrow, the other from baffled rage. The 

first was my mother, years ago before they killed 

her; the other was Sarkoja, when they dragged 

her from me today." 

"Your mother! " I exclaimed, "but, Sola, you 
could not have known your mother, child." 

[157] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



" But I did. And my father also," she added. 
"If you would like to hear the strange and unBarsoomian story come to the chariot tonight, 
John Carter, and I will tell you that of which I 
have never spoken in all my life before. And now ; 
the signal has been given to resume the march,, 
you must go." 

" I will come tonight, Sola," I promised. " Be 
sure to tell Dejah Thoris I am alive and well. I 
shall not force myself upon her, and be sure that 
you do not let her know I saw her tears. If she 
would speak with me I but await her command." 

Sola mounted the chariot, which was swinging 
into its place in line, and I hastened to my waiting 
thoat and galloped to my station beside Tars Tarkas at the rear of the column. 

We made a most imposing and awe-inspiring 
spectacle as we strung out across the yellow land 
scape; the two hundred and fifty ornate and 
brightly colored chariots, preceded by an advance 
guard of some two hundred mounted warriors and 
chieftains riding five abreast and one hundred 
yards apart, and followed by a like number in the 
same formation, with a score or more of flankers 
on either side; the fifty extra mastodons, or heavy 
draught animals, known as zitidars, and the five 

[158] 



SOLA TELLS ME HER STORY 

or six hundred extra thoats of the warriors running 
loose within the hollow square formed by the sur 
rounding warriors. The gleaming metal and 
jewels of the gorgeous ornaments of the men and 
women, duplicated in the trappings of the zitidars 
and thoats, and interspersed with the flashing 
colors of magnificent silks and furs and feathers, 
lent a barbaric splendor to the caravan which would 
have turned an East Indian potentate green with 
envy. 

The enormous broad tires of the chariots and 
the padded feet of the animals brought forth no 
sound from the moss-covered sea bottom; and so 
we moved in utter silence, like some huge phan 
tasmagoria, except when the stillness was broken 
by the guttural growling of a goaded zitidar, or 
the squealing of fighting thoats. The green Mar 
tians converse but little, and then usually in 
monosyllables, low and like the faint rumbling of 
distant thunder. 

We traversed a trackless waste of moss which, 
bending to the pressure of broad tire or padded 
foot, rose up again behind us, leaving no sign 
that we had passed. We might indeed have been 
the wraiths of the departed dead upon the dead 
sea of that dying planet for all the sound or sign 

[159] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



we made in passing. It was the first march of a 
large body of men and animals I had ever wit 
nessed which raised no dust and left no spoor; for 
there is no dust upon Mars except in the cultivated 
districts during the winter months, and even then 
the absence of high winds renders it almost unnoticeable. 

We camped that night at the foot of the hills 
we had been approaching for two days and which 
marked the southern boundary of this particular 
sea. Our animals had been two days without 
drink, nor had they had water for nearly two 
months, not since shortly after leaving Thark; 
but, as Tars Tarkas explained to me, they require 
but little and can live almost indefinitely upon the 
moss which covers Barsoom, and which, he told 
me, holds in its tiny stems sufficient moisture to 
meet the limited demands of the animals. 

After partaking of my evening meal of cheeselike food and vegetable milk I sought out Sola, 
whom I found working by the light of a torch 
upon some of Tars Tarkas' trappings. She looked 
up at my approach, her face lighting with pleasure 
and with welcome. 

" I am glad you came," she said ; " Dejah Thoris 
sleeps and I am lonely. Mine own people do not 
[160] 



SOLA TELLS ME HER STORY 

care for me, John Carter; I am too unlike them. 
It is a sad fate, since I must live my life amongst 
them, and I often wish that I were a true green 
Martian woman, without love and without hope; 
but I have known love and so I am lost. 

"I promised to tell you my story, or rather 
the story of my parents. From what I have learned 
of you and the ways of your people I am sure 
that the tale will not seem strange to you, but 
among green Martians it has no parallel within 
the memory of the oldest living Thark, nor do our 
legends hold many similar tales. 

" My mother was rather small, in fact too small 
to be allowed the responsibilities of maternity, as 
our chieftains breed principally for size. She was 
also less cold and cruel than most green Martian 
women, and caring little for their society, she 
often roamed the deserted avenues of Thark alone, 
or went and sat among the wild flowers that deck 
the near-by hills, thinking thoughts and wishing 
wishes which I believe I alone among Tharkian 
women today may understand, for am I not the 
child of my mother? 

"And there among the hills she met a young 
warrior, whose duty it was to guard the feeding 
zitidars and thoats and see that they roamed not 
[161] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



beyond the hills. They spoke at first only of such 
things as interest a community of Tharks, but 
gradually, as they came to meet more often, and, 
as was now quite evident to both, no longer by 
chance, they talked about themselves, their likes, 
their ambitions and their hopes. She trusted him 
and told him of the awful repugnance she felt for 
the cruelties of their kind, for the hideous, love 
less lives they must ever lead, and then she waited 
for the storm of denunciation to break from his 
cold, hard lips; but instead he took her in his arms 
and kissed her. 

"They kept their love a secret for six long 
years. She, my mother, was of the retinue of the 
great Tal Hajus, while her lover was a simple war 
rior, wearing only his own metal. Had their 
defection from the traditions of the Tharks been 
discovered both would have paid the penalty in 
the great arena before Tal Hajus and the 
assembled hordes. 

"The egg from which I came was hidden 
beneath a great glass vessel upon the highest and 
most inaccessible of the partially ruined towers of 
ancient Thark. Once each year my mother visited 
it for the five long years it lay there in the process 
of incubation. She dared not come oftener, for 
[162] 



SOLA TELLS ME HER STORY 

in the mighty guilt of her conscience she feared 
that her every move was watched. During this 
period my father gained great distinction as a 
warrior and had taken the metal from several 
chieftains. His love for my mother had never 
diminished, and his one ambition in life was to 
reach a point where he might wrest the metal from 
Tal Hajus himself, and thus, as ruler of the 
Tharks, be free to claim her as his own, as well 
as, by the might of his power, protect the child 
which otherwise would be quickly dispatched 
should the truth become known. 

"It was a wild dream, that of wresting the 
metal from Tal Hajus in five short years, but his 
advance was rapid, and he soon stood high in the 
councils of Thark. But one day the chance was 
lost forever, in so far as it could come in time to 
save his loved ones, for he was ordered away upon 
a long expedition to the ice-clad south, to make 
war upon the natives there and despoil them of 
their furs, for such is the manner of the green 
Barsoomian; he does not labor for what he can 
wrest in battle from others. 

"He was gone for four years, and when he 
returned all had been over for three ; for about a 
year after his departure, and shortly before the 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



time for the return of an expedition which had 
gone forth to fetch the fruits of a community incu 
bator, the egg had hatched. Thereafter my mother 
continued to keep me in the old tower, visiting me 
nightly and lavishing upon me the love the com 
munity life would have robbed us both of. She 
hoped, upon the return of the expedition from the 
incubator, to mix me with the other young assigned 
to the quarters of Tal Hajus, and thus escape the 
fate which would surely follow discovery of her 
sin against the ancient traditions of the green men. 

" She taught me rapidly the language and cus 
toms of my kind, and one night she told me the 
story I have told to you up to this point, impress 
ing upon me the necessity for absolute secrecy and 
the great caution I must exercise after she had 
placed me with the other young Tharks to permit 
no one to guess that I was further advanced in 
education than they, nor by any sign to divulge 
in the presence of others my affection for her, or 
my knowledge of my parentage ; and then drawing 
me close to her she whispered in my ear the name 
of my father. 

"And then a light flashed out upon the dark 
ness of the tower chamber, and there stood Sarkoja, her gleaming, baleful eyes fixed in a frenzy 
[164] 



SOLA TELLS ME HER STORY , 

of loathing and contempt upon my mother. The 
torrent of hatred and abuse she poured out upon 
her turned my young heart cold in terror. That 
she had heard the entire story was apparent, and 
that she had suspected something wrong from my 
; mother's long nightly absences from her quarters 
accounted for her presence there on that fateful 
night. 

"One thing she had not heard, nor did she 
know, the whispered name of my father. This 
was apparent from her repeated demands upon 
my mother to disclose the name of her partner in 
sin, but no amount of abuse or threats could wring 
this from her, and to save me from needless tor 
ture she lied, for she told Sarkoja that she alone 
knew nor would she even tell her child. 

"With final imprecations, Sarkoja hastened 
away to Tal Hajus to report her discovery, and 
while she was gone my mother, wrapping me in 
the silks and furs of her night coverings, so that I< 
was scarcely noticeable, descended to the streets? 
and ran wildly away toward the outskirts of the 
city, in the direction which led to the far south, 
out toward the man whose protection she might 
not claim, but on whose face she wished to look 
once more before she died. 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



"As we neared the city's southern extremity a 
sound came to us from across the mossy flat, from 
the direction of the only pass through the hills 
which led to the gates, the pass by which caravans 
from either north or south or east or west would 
enter the city. The sounds we heard were the 
squealing of thoats and the grumbling of zitidars, 
with the occasional clank of arms which announced 
the approach of a body of warriors. The thought 
uppermost in her mind was that it was my father 
returned from his expedition, but the cunning of 
the Thark held her from headlong and precipitate 
flight to greet him. 

" Retreating into the shadows of a doorway she 
awaited the coming of the cavalcade which shortly 
entered the avenue, breaking its formation and 
thronging the thoroughfare from wall to wall. 
As the head of the procession passed us the lesser 
moon swung dear of the overhanging roofs and 
lit up the scene with all the brilliancy of her won 
drous light. My mother shrank further back 
into the friendly shadows, and from her hiding 
place saw that the expedition was not that of my 
father, but the returning caravan bearing the young 
Tharks. Instantly her plan was formed, and as 
a great chariot swung close to our hiding place 



SOLA TELLS ME HER STORY 

she slipped stealthily in upon the trailing tail board, 
crouching low in the shadow of the high side, 
straining me to her bosom in a frenzy of love. 

" She knew, what I did not, that never again 
after that night would she hold me to her breast, 
nor was it likely we would ever look upon each 
other's face again. In the confusion of the plaza 
she mixed me with the other children, whose guar 
dians during the journey were now free to relin 
quish their responsibility. We were herded 
together into a great room, fed by women who 
had not accompanied the expedition, and the next 
day we were parceled out among the retinues of 
the chieftains. 
' I never saw my mother after that night. She 
was imprisoned by Tal Hajus, and every effort, 
including the most horrible and shameful torture, 
was brought to bear upon her to wring from her 
lips the name of my father; but she remained 
steadfast and loyal, dying at last amidst the laugh 
ter of Tal Hajus and his chieftains during some 
awful torture she was undergoing. 

" I learned afterwards that she told them that 

she had killed me to save me from a like fate at 

their hands, and that she had thrown my body to 

the white apes. Sarkoja alone disbelieved her, and 

[167] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



I feel to this day that she suspects my true origin, 
but does not date expose me, at the present, at 
all events, because she also guesses, I am sure, 
the identity of my father. 

"When he returned from his expedition and 
learned the story of my mother's fate I was pres 
ent as Tal Hajus told him ; but never by the quiver 
of a muscle did he betray the slightest emotion; 
only he did not laugh as Tal Hajus gleefully 
described her death struggles. From that moment 
on he was the crudest of the cruel, and I am 
awaiting the day when he shall win the goal of 
his ambition, and feel the carcass of Tal Hajus 
beneath his foot, for I am as sure that he but 
waits the opportunity to wreak a terrible ven 
geance, and that his great love is as strong in his 
breast as when it first transfigured him nearly 
forty years ago, as I am that we sit here upon the 
edge of a world-old ocean while sensible people 
sleep, John Carter." 

"And your father, Sola, is he with us now? 
I asked. 

'Yes," she replied, "but he does not know me 

for what I am, nor does he know who betrayed 

my mother to Tal Hajus. I alone know my father's 

name, and only I and Tal Hajus and Sarkoja know 

[168] 



SOLA TELLS ME HER STORY 

that it was she who carried the tale that brought 
death and torture upon her he loved." 

We sat silent for a few moments, she wrapped 
in the gloomy thoughts of her terrible past, and I 
in pity for the poor creatures whom the heartless, 
senseless customs of their race had doomed to 
loveless lives of cruelty and of hate. Presently 
she spoke. 

"John Carter, if ever a real man walked the 
cold, dead bosom of Barsoom you are one. I know 
that I can trust you, and because the knowledge 
may some day help you or him or Dejah Thoris 
or myself, I am going to tell you the name of my 
father, nor place any restrictions or conditions upon 
your tongue. When the time comes, speak the 
truth if it seems best to you. I trust you because 
I know that you are not cursed with the terrible 
trait of absolute and unswerving truthfulness, 
that you could lie like one of your own Virginia 
gentlemen if a lie would save others from sorrow 
or suffering. My father's name is Tars Tarkas. n 



[169] 



CHAPTER XVI 

WE PLAN ESCAPE 

i 

remainder of our journey to Thark was 
J_ uneventful. We were twenty days upon the 
road, crossing two sea bottoms and passing 
through or around a number of ruined cities, 
mostly smaller than Korad. Twice we crossed 
the famous Martian waterways, or canals, socalled by our earthly astronomers. When we 
approached these points a warrior would be sent 
far ahead with a powerful field glass, and if no 
great body of red Martian troops was in sight 
we would advance as close as possible without 
chance of being seen and then camp until dark, 
when we would slowly approach the cultivated 
tract, and, locating one of the numerous, broad 
highways which cross these areas at regular inter 
vals, creep silently and stealthily across to the arid 
lands upon the other side. It required five hours 
to make one of these crossings without a single 
halt, and the other consumed the entire night, so 
that we were just leaving the confines of the 
high-walled fields when the sun broke out upon us. 
[170] 



WE PLAN ESCAPE 



Crossing in the darkness, as we did, I was unable 
to see but little, except as the nearer moon, in her 
wild and ceaseless hurtling through the Barsoomian 
heavens, lit up little patches of the landscape from 
time to time, disclosing walled fields and low, 
rambling buildings, presenting much the appear 
ance of earthly farms. There were many trees, 
methodically arranged, and some of them were 
of enormous height; there were animals in some 
of the enclosures, and they announced their pres 
ence by terrified squealings and snortings as they 
scented our queer, wild beasts and wilder human 
beings. 

Only once did I perceive a human being, and 
that was at the intersection of our crossroad with 
the wide, white turnpike which cuts each cultivated 
district longitudinally at its exact center. The 
feliow must have been sleeping beside the road, 
for, as I came abreast of him, he raised upon one 
elbow and after a single glance at the approach 
ing caravan leaped shrieking to his feet and fled 
> madly dcsvn the road, scaling a near-by wall with 
the agility of a scared cat. The Tharks paid him 
not the slightest attention ; they were not out upon 
the warpath, and the only sign that I had that they 
had seen him was a quickening of the pace of the 

[171] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



caravan as we hastened toward the bordering des 
ert which marked our entrance into the realm of 
Tal Hajus. 

Not once did I have speech with Dejah Thoris, 
as she sent no word to me that I would be welcome 
at her chariot, and my foolish pride kept me from 
making any advances. I verily believe that a : 
man's way with women is in inverse ratio to his 
prowess among men. The weakling and the saphead have often great ability to charm the fair 
sex, while the fighting man who can face a thou 
sand real dangers unafraid, sits hiding in the 
shadows like some frightened child. 

Just thirty days after my advent upon Barsoom 
we entered the ancient city of Thark, from whose 
long forgotten people this horde of green men 
have stolen even their name. The hordes of Thark 
number some thirty thousand souls, and are divided 
into twenty-five communities. Each community 
has its own jed and lesser chieftains, but all are 
under the rule of Tal Hajus, Jeddak of Thark. 
Five communities make their headquarters at the 
city of Thark, and the balance are scattered among 
other deserted cities of ancient Mars throughout 
the district claimed by Tal Hajus. 

We made our entry into the great central plaza 
[172] 



WE PLAN ESCAPE 



early in the afternoon. There were no enthusiastic 
friendly greetings for the returned expedition. 
Those who chanced to be in sight spoke the names 
of warriors or women with whom they came in 
direct contact, in the formal greeting of their kind, 
but when it was discovered that they brought two 
captives a greater interest was aroused, and Dejah 
Thoris and I were the centers of inquiring groups. 
We were soon assigned to new quarters, and the 
balance of the day was devoted to settling our 
selves to the changed conditions. My home now 
was upon an avenue leading into the plaza from 
the south, the main artery down which we had 
marched from the gates of the city. I was at the 
far end of the square and had an entire building 
to myself. The same grandeur of architecture 
which was so noticeable a characteristic of Korad 
as in evidence here, only, if that were possible, 
on a larger and richer scale. My quarters would 
have been suitable for housing the greatest of 
earthly emperors, but to these queer creatures 
nothing about a building appealed to them but its 
size and the enormity of its chambers; the larger 

the building, the more desirable ; and so Tal Hajus 

f 

occupied what must have been an enormous public 

building, the largest in the city, but entirely unfitted 

[173] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



residence purposes; the next largest was 
reserved for Lorquas Ptomel, the next for the jed 
of a lesser rank, and so on to the bottom of the 
list of five jeds. The warriors occupied the build 
in with the chieftains to whose retinues they 
belonged; or, if they preferred, sought shelter 
among any of the thousands of untenanted build 
ings in their own quarter of town ; each community 
being assigned a certain section of the city. The 
selection of building had to be made in accordance 
with these divisions, except in so far as the jeds 
were concerned, they all occupying edifices which 
fronted upon the plaza. 

When I had finally put my house in order, or 
rather- seen that it had been done, it was nearlng 
sunset, and I hastened out with the intention of 
locating Sola and her chafes, as I had determined 
upon having speech with Dejah Thoris and trying 
to impress on her the necessity of our at least 
patching up a truce until I could find some way of 
aiding her to escape. I searched in vain until the 
upper rim of the great red sun was just disappear 
ing behind the horizon and then I spied the ugly 
head of Woola peering from a second-story win 
dow on the opposite side of the very street where 
I was quarttoVtvi but nearer the plaza. 

[174] 



WE PLAN ESCAPE 



Without waiting for a further invitation I bolted 
up the winding runway which led to the second 
floor, and entering a great chamber at the front 
of the building was greeted by the frenzied Woola, 
who threw his great carcass upon me, nearly hurl 
ing me to the floor; the poor old fellow was so 
glad to see me that I thought he would devour 
me, his head split from ear to ear, showing his 
three rows of tusks in his hobgoblin smile. 

Quieting him with a word of command and a 
caress, I looked hurriedly through the approach 
ing gloom for a sign of Dejah Thoris, and then, 
not seeing her, I called her name. There was an 
answering murmur from the far corner of the 
apartment, and with a couple of quick strides I 
was standing beside her where she crouched among 
the furs and silks upon an ancient carved wooden 
seat. As I waited she rose to her full height and 
looking me straight in the eye said : 

"What would Dotar Sojat, Thark, of Dejah 
Thoris his captive ? " 

"Dejah Thoris, I do not know how I have 
angered you. It was furtherest from my desire 
to hurt or offend you, whom I had hoped to pro 
tect and comfort. Have none of me if it is your 
will, but that you must aid me in effecting yo 

[175] 



escape, if such a thing be possible, is not my 
request, but my command. When you are safe 
once more at your father's court you may do with 
me as you please, but from now on until that day 
I am your master, and you must obey and aid me." 

She looked at me long and earnestly and I 
thought that she was softening toward me. 

"I understand your words, Dotar Sojat," she 
replied, "but you I do not understand. You are a 
queer mixture of child and man, of brute and 
noble. I only wish that I might read your heart." 

"Look down at your feet, Dejah Thoris; it lies 
there now where it has lain since that other night 
at Korad, and where it will ever lie beating alone 
for you until death stills it forever." 

She took a little step toward me, her beautiful 
hands outstretched in a strange, groping gesture. 

"What do you mean, John Carter?" she whis 
pered. "What are you saying to me? " 

" I am saying what I had promised myself that 
I would not say to you, at least until you were no 
longer a captive among the green men ; what from 
your attitude toward me for the past twenty days 
I had thought never to say to you; I am saying, 
Dejah Thoris, that I am yours, body and soul, 
to serve you, to fight far you, and to die for you. 



WE PLAN ESCAPE 



Only one thing I ask of you in return, and that is 
that you make no sign, either of condemnation or 
of approbation of my words until you are safe 
among your own people, and that whatever senti 
ments you harbor toward me they be not influenced 
or colored by gratitude; whatever I may do to 
serve you will be prompted solely from selfish 
motives, since it gives me more pleasure to serve 
you than not." 

" I will respect your wishes, John Carter, 
because I understand the motives which prompt 
them, and I accept your service no more willingly 
than I bow to your authority; your word shall be 
my law. I have twice wronged you in my thoughts 
and again I ask your forgiveness." 

Further conversation of a personal nature was 
prevented by the entrance of Sola, who was much 
agitated and wholly unlike her usual calm and 
possessed self. 

"That horrible Sarkoja has been before Tal 
Hajus," she cried, " and from what I heard upon 
the plaza there is little hope for either of you." 

"What do they say?" inquired DejahThoris. 

"That you will be thrown to the wild calots 
[dogs] in the great arena as soon as the hordes 
have assembled for the yearly games." 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



' Sola," I said, "you are a Thark, but you hate 
and loathe the customs of your people as much as 
we do. Will you not accompany us in one supreme 
effort to escape? I am sure that Dejah Thoris 
can offer you a home and protection among her 
people, and your fate can be no worse among them 
than it must ever be here." 

"Yes," cried Dejah Thoris, "come with us, 
Sola, you will be better off among the red men of 
Helium than you are here, and I can promise you 
not only a home with us, but the love and affection 
your nature craves and which must always be 
denied you by the customs of your own race. Come 
with us, Sola ; we might go without you, but your 
fate would be terrible if they thought you had 
connived to aid us. I know that even that fear 
would not tempt you to interfere in our escape, 
but we want you with us, we want you to come to 
a land of sunshine and happiness, amongst a peo 
ple who know the meaning of love, of sympathy, 
and of gratitude. Say that you will, Sola; tell 
me that you will." 

" The great waterway which leads to Helium is 

but fifty miles to the south," murmured Sola, half 

to herself; "a swift thoat might make it in three 

hours; and then to Helium it is five hundred miles, 

[178] 




SHE DREW UPON THE MARBLE FLOOR THE FIRST MAP OF THE 

BARSOOMIAN TERRITORY I HAD EVER SEEN. Page 17& 



WE PLAN ESCAPE 



most of the way through thinly settled districts. 
They would know and they would follow us. We 
might hide among the great trees for a time, but 
the chances are small indeed for escape. They 
would follow us to the very gates of Helium, and 
they would take toll of life at every step ; you do 
not know them." 

"Is there no other way we might reach 
Helium?" I asked. "Can you not draw me a 
rough map of the country we must traverse, Dejah 
Thoris?" 

" Yes," she replied, and taking a great diamond 
from her hair she drew upon the marble floor the 
first map of Barsoomian territory I had ever seen. 
It was crisscrossed in every direction with long 
straight lines, sometimes running parallel and 
sometimes converging toward some great circle. 
The lines, she said, were waterways; the circles, 
cities; and one far to the northwest of us she 
pointed out as Helium. There were other cities 
closer, but she said she feared to enter many of 
them, as they were not all friendly toward Helium. 

Finally, after studying the map carefully in the 
moonlight which now flooded the room, I pointed 
out a waterway far to the north of us which also 
seemed to lead to Helium. 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



" Does not this pierce your grandfather's terri 
tory?" I asked. 

"Yes," she answered, "but it is two hundred 
miles north of us; it is one of the waterways we 
crossed on the trip to Thark." 

"They would never suspect that we would try 
for that distant waterway," I answered, " and that 
is why I think that it is the best route for our 
escape." 

Sola agreed with me, and it was decided that we 
should leave Thark this same night ; just as quickly, 
in fact, as I could find and saddle my thoats. 
Sola was to ride one and Dejah Thoris and I 
the other; each of us carrying sufficient food and 
drink to last us for two days, since the animals 
could not be urged too rapidly for so long a dis 
tance. 

I directed Sola to proceed with Dejah Thoris 
along one of the less frequented avenues to the 
southern boundary of the city, where I would over 
take them with the thoats as quickly as possible; 
then, leaving them to gather what food, silks, and 
furs we were to need, I slipped quietly to the rear 
of the first floor, and entered the courtyard, where 
our animals were moving restlessly about, as was 
their habit, before settling down for the night. 
[180] 



In the shadows of the buildings and out beneath 
the radiance of the Martian moons moved the 
great herd of thoats and zitidars, the latter grunt 
ing their low gutturals and the former occasionally 
emitting the sharp squeal which denotes the almost 
habitual state of rage in which these creatures 
passed their existence. They were quieter now, 
owing to the absence of man, but as they scented 
me they became more restless and their hideous 
noise increased. It was risky business, this enter 
ing a paddock of thoats alone and at night; first, 
because their increasing noisiness might warn the 
near-by warriors that something was amiss, and 
also because for the slightest cause, or for no cause 
at all some great bull thoat might take it upon 
himself to lead a charge upon me. 

Having no desire to awaken their nasty tem 
pers upon such a night as this, where so much 
depended upon secrecy and dispatch, I hugged the 
shadows of the buildings, ready at an instant's 
warning to leap into the safety of a near-by door 
or window. Thus I moved silently to the great 
gates which opened upon the street at the back 
of the court, and as I neared the exit I called 
softly to my two animals. How I thanked the 
kind providence which had given me the fore[181] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



sight to win the love and confidence of these wild 
dumb brutes, for presently from the far side of 
the court I saw two huge bulks forcing their way 
toward me through the surging mountains of flesh. 

They came quite close to me, rubbing their 
muzzles against my body and nosing for the bits 
of food it was always my practice to reward them 
with. Opening the gates I ordered the two great 
beasts to pass out, and then slipping quietly after 
them I closed the portals behind me. 

I did not saddle or mount the animals there, 
but instead walked quietly in the shadows of the 
buildings toward an unfrequented avenue which 
lead toward the point I had arranged to meet 
Dejah Thoris and Sola. With the noiselessness 
of disembodied spirits we moved stealthily along 
the deserted streets, but not until we were within 
sight of the plain beyond the city did I commence 
to breathe freely. I was sure that Sola and Dejah 
Thoris would find no difficulty in reaching our 
rendezvous undetected, but with my great thoats 
I was not so sure for myself, as it was quite 
unusual for warriors to leave the city after dark; 
in fact there was no place for them to go within 
any but a long ride. 

I reached the appointed meeting place safely, 



WE PLAN ESCAPE 



but as Dejah Thoris and Sola were not there I 
led my animals into the entrance hall of one of 
the large buildings. Presuming that one of the 
other women of the same household may have 
come in to speak to Sola, and so delayed their 
departure, I did not feel any undue apprehension 
until nearly an hour had passed without a sign of 
them, and by the time another half hour had 
crawled away I was becoming filled with grave 
anxiety. Then there broke upon the stillness of 
the night the sound of an approaching party, 
which, from the noise, I know could be no fugi 
tives creeping stealthily toward liberty. Soon the 
party was near me, and from the black shadows 
of my entrance way I perceived a score of mounted 
warriors, who, in passing, dropped a dozen words 
that fetched my heart clean into the top of my 
head. 

" He would likely have arranged to meet them 
just without the city, and so " I heard no more, 
they had passed on; but it was enough. Our plan 
had been discovered, and the chances for escape 
from now on to the fearful end would be small 
indeed. My one hope now was to return unde 
tected to the quarters of Dejah Thoris and learn 
what fate had overtaken her, but how: to do it 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



with these great monstrous thoats upon my hands, 
now that the city probably was aroused by the 
knowledge of my escape was a problem of no 
mean proportions. 

Suddenly an idea occurred to me, and acting 
on my knowledge of the construction of the build 
ings of these ancient Martian cities with a hollow 
court within the center of each square, I groped 
my way blindly through the dark chambers, calling 
the great thoats after me. They had difficulty in 
negotiating some of the doorways, but as the 
buildings fronting the city's principal exposures 
were all designed upon a magnificent scale, they 
were able to wriggle through without sticking fast ; 
and thus we finally made the inner court where I 
found, as I had expected, the usual carpet of 
moss-like vegetation which would prove their food 
and drink until I could return them to their own 
enclosure. That they would be as quiet and contented here as elsewhere I was confident, nor was 
there but the remotest possibility that they would 
be discovered, as the green men had no great 
desire to enter these outlying buildings, which 
were frequented by the only thing, I believe, which 
caused them the sensation of fear the great 
white apes of Barsoom. 

[184] 



WE PLAN ESCAPE 



Removing the saddle trappings, I hid them just 
within the rear doorway of the building through 
which we had entered the court, and, turning the 
beasts loose, quickly made my way across the 
court to the rear of the buildings upon the fur 
ther side, and thence to the avenue beyond. Wait 
ing in the doorway of the building until I was 
assured 'that no one was approaching, I hurried 
across to the opposite side and through the first 
doorway to the court beyond; thus, crossing 
through court after court with only the slight 
chance of detection which the necessary crossing of 
the avenues entailed, I made my way in safety to 
the courtyard in the rear of Dejah Thoris' quarters. 

Here, of course, I found the beasts of the war 
riors who quartered in the adjacent buildings, and 
the warriors themselves I might expect to meet 
within if I entered; but, fortunately for me, I had 
another and safer method of reaching the upper 
story where Dejah Thoris should be found, and, 
after first determining as nearly as possible which 
of the buildings she occupied, for I had never 
observed them before from the court side, I took 
advantage of my relatively great strength and 
agility and sprang upward until I grasped the sill 
of a second-story window which I thought to be 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



in the rear of her apartment. Drawing myself 
inside the room I moved stealthily toward the 
front of the building, and not until I had quite 
reached the doorway of her room was I made 
aware by voices that it was occupied. 

I did not rush headlong in, but listened without 
to assure myself that it was Dejah Thoris and that 
it was safe to venture within. It was well indeed 
that I took this precaution, for the conversation 
I heard was in the low gutturals of men, and the 
words which finally came to me proved a most 
timely warning. The speaker was a chieftain and 
he was giving orders to four of his warriors. 

"And when he returns to this chamber," he was 
saying, " as he surely will when he finds she does 
not meet him at the city's edge, you four are to 
spring upon him and disarm him. It will require 
the combined strength of all of you to do it if the 
reports they bring back from Korad are correct. 
When you have him fast bound bear him to the 
vaults beneath the jeddak's quarters and chain 
him securely where he may be found when Tal 
Hajus wishes him. Allow him to speak with none, 
nor permit any other to enter this apartment before 
he comes. There will be no danger of the girl 
returning, for by this time she is safe in the arms 
1.18 



WE PLAN ESCAPE 



ef Tal Hajus, and may all her ancestors have pity 
upon her, for Tal Hajus will have none ; the great 
Sarkoja has done a noble night's work. I go, and 
if you fail to capture him when he comes, I com 
mend your carcasses to the cold bosom of Iss." 







CHAPTER XVII 

A COSTLY RECAPTURE 

AS the speaker ceased he turned to leave the  -apartment by the door where I was stand 
ing, but I needed to wait no longer; I had heard 
enough to fill my soul with dread, and stealing 
quietly away I returned to the courtyard by the 
way I had come. My plan of action was formed 
upon the instant, and crossing the square and the 
bordering avenue upon the opposite side I soon 
stood within the courtyard of Tal Hajus. 

The brilliantly lighted apartments of the first 
floor told me where first to seek, and advancing 
to the windows I peered within. I soon discovered 
that my approach was not to be the easy thing I 
had hoped, for the rear rooms bordering the court 
were filled with warriors and women. I then 
glanced up at the stories above, discovering that 
the third was apparently unlighted, and so decided 
to make my entrance to the building from that 
point. It was the work of but a moment for me 
to reach the windows above, and soon I had drawn 
[188] 



A COSTLY RECAPTURE 



myself within the sheltering shadows of the unlighted third floor. 

Fortunately the room I had selected was untenanted, and creeping noiselessly to the corridor 
beyond I discovered a light in the apartments 
ahead of me. Reaching what appeared to be a 
doorway I discovered that it was but an opening 
upon an immense inner chamber which towered 
from the first floor, two stories below me, to the 
dome-like roof of the building, high above my 
head. The floor of this great circular hall was 
thronged with chieftains, warriors and women, 
and at one end was a great raised platform upon 
which squatted the most hideous beast I had ever 
put my eyes upon. He had all the cold, hard, 
cruel, terrible features of the green warriors, but 
accentuated and debased by the animal passions 
to which he had given himself over for many years. 
There was not a mark of dignity or pride upon 
his bestial countenance, while his enormous bulk 
spread itself out upon the platform where he 
squatted like some huge devil fish, his six limbs 
accentuating the similarity in a horrible and star 
tling manner. 

But the sight that froze me with apprehension 
was that of Dejah Thoris and Sola standing there 
[189] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



before him, and the fiendish leer of him as he let 
his great protruding eyes gloat upon the lines of 
her beautiful figure. She was speaking, but I 
could not hear what she said, nor could I make 
out the low grumbling of his reply. She stood 
there erect before him, her head high held, and 
even at the distance I was from them I could read 
the scorn and disgust upon her face as she let her 
haughty glance rest without sign of fear upon him. 
She was indeed the proud daughter of a thousand 
jeddaks, every inch of her dear, precious little 
body; so small, so frail beside the towering war 
riors around her, but in her majesty dwarfing 
them into insignificance; she was the mightiest 
figure among them and I verily believe that they 
felt it. 

Presently Tal Hajus made a sign that the 
chamber be cleared, and that the prisoners be left 
alone before him. Slowly the chieftains, the war 
riors and the women melted away into the shadows 
of the surrounding chambers, and Dejah Thoris 
and Sola stood alone before the jeddak of the 
Tharks. 

One chieftain alone had hesitated before depart 
ing; I saw him standing in the shadows of a mighty 
column, his fingers nervously toying with the hilt 
[190] 



A COSTLY RECAPTURE 



of his great-sword and his cruel eyes bent in implac 
able hatred upon Tal Hajus. It was Tars Tarkas, 
and I could read his thoughts as they were an open 
book for the undisguised loathing upon his face. 
He was thinking of that other woman who, forty 
years ago, had stood before this beast, and could 
I have spoken a word into his ear at that moment 
the reign of Tal Hajus would have been over; 
but finally he also strode from the room, not know 
ing that he left his own daughter at the mercy of 
the creature he most loathed. 

Tal Hajus arose, and I, half fearing, half antici 
pating his intentions, hurried to the winding run 
way which led to the floors below. No one was 
near to intercept me, and I reached the main floor 
of the chamber unobserved, taking my station in 
the shadow of the same column that Tars Tarkas 
had but just deserted. As I reached the floor 
Tal Hajus was speaking. 

" Princess of Helium, I might wring a mighty 
ransom from your people would I but return you 
to them unharmed, but a thousand times rather 
would I watch that beautiful face writhe in the 
agony of torture ; it shall be long drawn out, that 
I promise you: ten days of pleasure were all too 
short to show the love I harbor for your race. The 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



terrors of your death shall haunt the slumbers of 
the red men through all the ages to come; they 
will shudder in the shadows of the night as their 
fathers tell them of the awful vengeance of the 
green men ; of the power and might and hate and 
cruelty of Tal Hajus. But before the torture you 
shall be mine for one short hour, and word of that 
too shall go forth to Tardos Mors, Jeddak of 
Helium, your grandfather, that he may grovel 
upon the ground in the agony of his sorrow. 
Tomorrow the torture will commence; tonight 
thou art Tal Hajus' ; come ! " 

He sprang down from the platform and grasped 
her roughly by the arm, but scarcely had he touched 
her than I leaped between them. My short-sword, 
sharp and gleaming was in my right hand ; I could 
have plunged it into his putrid heart before he 
realized that I was upon him ; but as I raised my 
arm to strike I thought of Tars Tarkas, and, with 
all my rage, with all my hatred, I could not rob 
him of that sweet moment for which he had lived 
and hoped all these long, weary years, and so, 
instead, I swung my good right fist full upon the 
point of his jaw. Without a sound he slipped to 
the floor as one dead. 

In the same deathly silence I grasped Dejah 
[192] 



A COSTLY RECAPTURE 



Thoris by the hand, and motioning to Sola to fol 
low we sped noiselessly from the chamber and to 
the floor above. Unseen we reached a rear win 
dow and with the straps and leather of my trap 
pings I lowered, first Sola and then Dejah Thoris 
to the ground below. Dropping lightly after them 
I drew them rapidly around the court in the 
shadows of the buildings, and thus we returned 
over the same course I had so recently followed 
from the distant boundary of the city. 

We finally came upon my thoats in the court 
yard where I had left them, and placing the trap 
pings upon them we hastened through the build 
ing to the avenue beyond. Mounting, Sola upon 
one beast, and Dejah Thoris behind me upon the 
other, we rode from the city of Thark through the 
hills to the south. 

Instead of circling back around the city to the 
northwest and toward the nearest waterway which 
lay so short a distance from us, we turned to the 
northeast and struck out upon the mossy waste 
across which, for two hundred dangerous and 
weary miles, lay another main artery leading to 
Helium. 

No word was spoken until we had left the city 
for behind, but I could hear the quiet sobbing of 
[193] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



Dejah Thoris as she clung to me with her dear 
head resting against my shoulder. 

" If we make it, my chieftain, the debt of 
Helium will be a mighty one; greater than she 
can every pay you; and should we not make it," 
she continued, " the debt is no less, though Helium 
will never know, for you have saved the last of 
our line from worse than death." 

I did not answer, but instead reached to my side 
and pressed the little fingers of her I loved where 
they clung to me for support, and then, in un 
broken silence, we sped over the yellow, moonlit 
moss; each of us occupied with his own thoughts. 
For my part I could not be other than joyful had I 
tried, with Dejah Thoris' warm body pressed close 
to mine, and with all our unpassed danger my 
heart was singing as gaily as though we were 
already entering the gates of Helium. 

Our earlier plans had been so sadly upset that 
we now found ourselves without food or drink, 
and I alone was armed. We therefore urged our 
beasts to a speed that must tell on them sorely 
before we could hope to sight the ending of the 
first stage of our journey. 

We rode all night and all the following day 
with only a few short rests. On the second night 
[194] 



A COSTLY RECAPTURE 



both we and our animals were completely fagged, 
and so we lay down upon the moss and slept for 
some five or six hours, taking up the journey once 
more before daylight. All the following day we 
rode, and when, late in the afternoon we had 
sighted no distant trees, the mark of the great 
waterways throughout all Barsoom, the terrible 
truth flashed upon us we were lost. 

Evidently we had circled, but which way it was 
difficult to say, nor did it seem possible with the 
sun to guide us by day and the moons and stars 
by night. At any rate no waterway was in sight, 
and the entire party was almost ready to drop 
from hunger, thirst and fatigue. Far ahead of 
us and a trifle to the right we could distinguish 
the outlines of low mountains. These we decided 
to attempt to reach in the hope that from some 
ridge we might discern the missing waterway. 
Night fell upon us before we reached our goal, 
and, almost fainting from weariness and weakness, 
we lay down and slept. 

I was awakened early in the morning by some 
huge body pressing close to mine, and opening my 
eyes with a start I beheld my blessed old Woola 
snuggling close to me; the faithful brute had fol 
lowed us across that trackless waste to share our 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



fate, whatever it might be. Putting my arms about 
his neck I pressed my cheek close to his, nor am I 
ashamed that I did it, nor of the tears that came 
to my eyes as I thought of his love for me. Shortly 
after this Dejah Thoris and Sola awakened, and 
it was decided that we push on at once in an effort 
to gain the hills. 

We had gone scarcely a mile when I noticed 
that my thoat was commencing to stumble and 
stagger in a most pitiful manner, although we had 
not attempted to force them out of a walk since 
about noon of the preceding day. Suddenly he 
lurched wildly to one side and pitched violently to 
the ground. Dejah Thoris and I were thrown 
clear of him and fell upon the soft moss with 
scarcely a jar; but the poor beast was in a pitiable 
condition, not even being able to rise, although 
relieved of our weight. Sola told me that the 
coolness of the night, when it fell, together with 
the rest would doubtless revive him, and so I 
decided not to kill him, as was my first intention, 
as I had thought it cruel to leave him alone there 
to die of hunger and thirst. Relieving him of his 
trappings, which I flung down beside him, we left 
the poor fellow to his fate, and pushed on with 
the one thoat as best we could. Sola and I walked, 
[196] 



A COSTLY RECAPTURE 



making Dejah Thoris ride, much against her will. 
In this way we had progressed to within about a 
mile of the hills we were endeavoring to reach 
when Dejah Thoris, from her point of vantage 
upon the thoat, cried out that she saw a great 
party of mounted men filing down from a pass in 
the hills several miles away. Sola and I both 
looked in the direction she indicated, and there, 
plainly discernible, were several hundred mounted 
warriors. They seemed to be headed in a south 
westerly direction, which would take them away 
from us. 

They doubtless were Thark warriors who had 
been sent out to capture us, and we breathed a 
great sigh of relief that they were traveling in the 
opposite direction. Quickly lifting Dejah Thoris 
from the thoat, I commanded the animal to lie 
down and we three then did the same, presenting 
as small an object as possible for fear of attract 
ing the attention of the warriors toward us. 

We could see them as they filed out of the pass, 
just for an instant, before they were lost to view 
behind a friendly ridge; to us a most providential 
ridge; since, had they been in view for any great 
length of time, they scarcely could have failed to 
discover us. As what proved to be the last war
[197] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



rior came into view from the pass, he halted and, 
to our consternation, threw his small but powerful 
fieldglass to his eye and scanned the sea bottom in 
all directions. Evidently he was a chieftain, for in 
certain marching formations among the green men 
a chieftain brings up at the extreme rear of the 
column. As his glass swung toward us our hearts 
stopped in our breasts, and I could feel the cold 
sweat start from every pore in my body. 

Presently it swung full upon us and stopped. 
The tension on our nerves was near the breaking 
point, and I doubt if any of us breathed for the 
few moments he held us covered by his glass ; and 
then he lowered it and we could see him shout a 
command to the warriors who had passed from 
our sight behind the ridge. He did not wait for 
them to join him, however, instead he wheeled 
his thoat and came tearing madly in our direction. 

There was but one slight chance and that we 
must take quickly. Raising my strange Martian 
rifle to my shoulder I sighted and touched the 
button which controlled the trigger; there was a 
sharp explosion as the missile reached its goal, 
and the charging chieftain pitched backward from 
his flying mount. 

Springing to my feet I urged the thoat to rise, 
[198] 



A COSTLY RECAPTURE 



and directed Sola to take Dejah Thorls with her 
upon him and make a mighty effort to reach the 
hills before the green warriors were upon us. I 
knew that in the ravines and gullies they might 
find a temporary hiding place, and even though 
they died there of hunger and thirst it would be 
better so than that they fell into the hands of 
the Tharks. Forcing my two revolvers upon them 
as a slight means of protection, and, as a last 
resort, as an escape for themselves from the horrid 
death which recapture would surely mean, I lifted 
Dejah Thoris in my arms and placed her upon 
the thoat behind Sola, who had already mounted 
at my command. 

"Good-bye, my princess," I whispered, "we 
may meet in Helium yet. I have escaped from 
worse plights than this," and I tried to smile as 
I lied. 

"What," she cried, "are you not coming with 
us?" 

"How may I, Dejah Thoris? Some one must 
hold these fellows off for a while, and I can better 
escape them alone than could the three of us 
together." 

She sprang quickly from the thoat and, throw 
ing her dear arms about my neck, turned to Sola, 
[199] 



'A PRINCESS OF MARS 



saying with quiet dignity: "Fly, Sola! Dejah 
Thoris remains to die with the man she loves." 

Those words are engraved upon my heart. Ah, 
gladly would I give up my life a thousand times 
could I only hear them once again; but I could 
not then give even a second to the rapture of her 
sweet embrace, and pressing my lips to hers for 
the first time, I picked her up bodily and tossed 
her to her seat behind Sola again, commanding the 
latter in peremptory tones to hold her there by 
force, and then, slapping the thoat upon the flank, 
I saw them borne away; Dejah Thoris struggling 
to the last to free herself from Sola's grasp. 

Turning, I beheld the green warriors mounting 
the ridge and looking for their chieftain. In a 
moment they saw him, and then me; but scarcely 
had they discovered me than I commenced firing, 
lying flat upon my belly in the moss. I had an 
even hundred rounds in the magazine of my rifle, 
and another hundred in the belt at my back, and I 
kept up a continuous stream of fire until I saw all 
of the warriors who had been first to return from 
behind the ridge either dead or scurrying to cover. 

My respite was short lived however, for soon 
the entire party, numbering some thousand men, 
came charging into view, racing madly toward me. 
[200] 



A COSTLY RECAPTURE 



I fired until my rifle was empty and they were 
almost upon me, and then a glance showing me 
that Dejah Thoris and Sola had disappeared 
among the hills, I sprang up, throwing down my 
useless gun, and started away in the direction 
opposite to that taken by Sola and her charge. 

If ever Martians had an exhibition of jumping, 
it was granted those astonished warriors on that 
day long years ago, but while it led them away 
from Dejah Thoris it did not distract their atten 
tion from endeavoring to capture me. 

They raced wildly after me until, finally, my 
foot struck a projecting piece of quartz, and down, 
I went sprawling upon the moss. As I looked up 
they were upon me, and although I drew my longsword in an attempt to sell my life as dearly as 
possible, it was soon over. I reeled beneath their 
blows which fell upon me in perfect torrents ; my 
head swam; all was black, and I went down 
beneath them to oblivion. 



[201] 



CHAPTER XVIII 

CHAINED IN WARHOON 

IT must have been several hours before I re 
gained consciousness and I well remember the 
feeling of surprise which cwept over me as I 
realized that I was not dead. 

I was lying among a pile of sleeping silks and 
furs in the corner of a small room in which were 
several green warriors, and bending over me was 
an ancient and ugly female. 

As I opened my eyes she turned to one of the 
warriors, saying, 

"He will live, O, Jed." 

" 'Tis well," replied the one so addressed, ris 
ing and approaching my couch, " he should render 
rare sport for the great games." 

And now as my eyes fell upon him, I saw that 
he was no Thark, for his ornaments and metal 
were not of that horde. He was a huge fellow, 
terribly scarred about the face and chest, and with 
one broken tusk and a missing ear. Strapped on 
either breast were human skulls and depending 
from these a number of dried human hands. 
[202] 



CHAINED IN WARHOON 

His reference to the great games of which I 
had heard so much while among the Tharks con 
vinced me that I had but jumped from purgatory 
into gehenna. 

After a few more words with the female, during 
which she assured him that I was now fully fit 
to travel, the jed ordered that we mount and ride 
after the main column. 

I was strapped securely to as wild and unman 
ageable a thoat as I had ever seen, and, with a 
mounted warrior on either side to prevent the 
beast from bolting, we rode forth at a furious pace 
in pursuit of the column. My wounds gave me 
but little pain, so wonderfully and rapidly had the 
applications and injections of the female exer 
cised their therapeutic powers, and so deftly had 
she bound and plastered the injuries. 

Just before dark we reached the main body of 
troops shortly after they had made camp for the 
night. I was immediately taken before the leader, 
who proved to be the jeddak of the hordes of 
Warhoon. 

Like the jed who had brought me, he was fright 
fully scarred, and also decorated with the breast 
plate of human skulls and dried dead hands which 
seemed to mark all the greater warriors among 
[203] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



the Warhoons, as well as to indicate their awful 
ferocity, which greatly transcends even that of the 
Tharks. 

The jeddak, Bar Comas, who was compara 
tively young, was the object of the fierce and 
jealous hatred of his old lieutenant, Dak Kova, 
the jed who had captured me, and I could not but 
note the almost studied efforts which the latter 
made to affront his superior. 

He entirely omitted the usual formal saluta 
tion as we entered the presence of the jeddak, and 
as he pushed me roughly before the ruler he 
exclaimed in a loud and menacing voice, 

u I have brought a strange creature wearing the 
metal of a Thark whom it is my pleasure to have 
battle with a wild thoat at the great games." 

"He will die as Bar Comas, your jeddak, sees 
fit, if at all," replied the young ruler, with em 
phasis and dignity. 

" If at all ? " roared Dak Kova. " By the dead 
hands at my throat but he shall die, Bar Comas. 
No maudlin weakness on your part shall save 
him. O, would that Warhoon were ruled by a 
real jeddak rather than by a water-hearted weak 
ling from whom even old Dak Kova could tear 
the metal with his bare hands 1 " 
[204] 



CHAINED IN WARHOON 



Bar Comas eyed the defiant and insubordinate 
chieftain for an instant, his expression one of 
haughty, fearless contempt and hate, and then 
without drawing a weapon and without uttering a 
word he hurled himself at the throat of his 
defamer. 

I never before had seen two green Martian 
warriors battle with nature's weapons and the 
exhibition of animal ferocity which ensued was 
as fearful a thing as the most disordered imagina 
tion could picture. They tore at each others' eyes 
and ears with their hands and with their gleaming 
tusks repeatedly slashed and gored until both were 
cut fairly to ribbons from head to foot. 

Bar Comas had much the better of the battle 
as he was stronger, quicker and more intelligent. 
It soon seemed that the encounter was done sav 
ing only the final death thrust when Bar Comas 
slipped in breaking away from a clinch. It was 
the one little opening that Dak Kova needed, and 
hurling himself at the body of his adversary he 
buried his single mighty tusk in Bar Comas' groin 
and with a last powerful effort ripped the young 
jeddak wide open the full length of his body, the 
great tusk finally wedging in the bones of Bar 
Comas' jaw. Victor and vanquished rolled limp 
[205] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



and lifeless upon the moss, a huge mass of torn 
and bloody flesh. 

Bar Comas was stone dead, and only the most 
herculean efforts on the part of Dak Kova's 
females saved him from the fate he deserved. 
Three days later he walked without assistance to 
the body of Bar Comas which, by custom, had not 
been moved from where it fell, and placing his 
foot upon the neck of his erstwhile ruler he 
assumed the title of Jeddak of Warhoon. 

The dead jeddak's hands and head were 
removed to be added to the ornaments of his 
conqueror, and then his women cremated what 
remained, amid wild and terrible laughter. 

The injuries to Dak Kova had delayed the 
march so greatly that it was decided to give up 
the expedition, which was a raid upon a small 
Thark community in retaliation for the destruc 
tion of the incubator, until after the great games, 
and the entire body of warriors, ten thousand in 
number, turned back toward Warhoon. 

My introduction to these cruel and blood 
thirsty people was but an index to the scenes I 
witnessed almost daily while with them. They 
are a smaller horde than the Tharks but much 
more ferocious. Not a day passed but that some 
[206] 



CHAINED IN WARHOON 



members of the various Warhoon communities 
met in deadly combat. I have seen as high as 
eight mortal duels within a single day. 

We reached the city of Warhoon after some 
three days march and I was immediately cast 
into a dungeon and heavily chained to the floor 
arid walls. Food was brought me at intervals but 
owing to the utter darkness of the place I do not 
know whether I lay there days, or weeks, or 
months. It was the most horrible experience of 
all my life and that my mind did not give way to 
the terrors of that inky blackness has been a 
wonder to me ever since. The place was filled 
with creeping, crawling things; cold, sinuous 
bodies passed over me when I lay down, and in 
the darkness I occasionally caught glimpses of 
gleaming, fiery eyes, fixed in horrible intentness 
upon me. No sound reached me from the world 
'above and no word would my jailer vouchsafe 
when my food was brought to me, although I at 
first bombarded him with questions. 

Finally all the hatred and maniacal loathing for 
these awful creatures who had placed me in this 
horrible place was centered by my tottering reason 
upon this single emissary who represented to me 
the entire horde of Warhoons. 
[207] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



I had noticed that he always advanced with 
his dim torch to where he could place the food 
within my reach and as he stooped to place it upon 
the floor his head was about on a level with my 
breast. So, with the cunning of a madman, I 
backed into the far corner of my cell when next 
I heard him approaching and gathering a little 
slack of the great chain which held me in my hand 
I waited his coming, crouching like some beast of 
prey. As he stooped to place my food upon the 
ground I swung the chain above my head and 
crashed the links with all my strength upon his 
skull. Without a sound he slipped to the floor, 
stone dead. 

Laughing and chattering like the idiot I was 
fast becoming I fell upon his prostrate form my 
fingers feeling for his dead throat. Presently they 
came in contact with a small chain at the end of 
which dangled a number of keys. The touch of 
my fingers on these keys brought back my reason 
with the suddenness of thought. No longer was I 
a jibbering idiot, but a sane, reasoning man with 
the means of escape within my very hands. 

As I was groping to remove the chain from 
about my victim's neck I glanced up into the dark 
ness to see six pairs of gleaming eyes fixed, unwink
[208] 



ing, upon me. Slowly they approached and slowly 
I shrank back from the awful horror of them. 
Back into my corner I crouched holding my hands, 
palms out, before me, and stealthily on came the 
awful eyes until they reached the dead body at my 
feet. Then slowly they retreated but this time 
with a strange grating sound and finally they 
disappeared in some black and distant recess of 
my dungeon. 



1209;? 



CHAPTER XIX 

BATTLING IN THE ARENA 

SLOWLY I regained my composure and finally 
essayed again to attempt to remove the keys 
from the dead body of my former jailer. But as 
I reached out into the darkness to locate it I 
found to my horror that it was gone. Then the 
truth flashed on me; the owners of those gleaming 
eyes had dragged my prize away from me to be 
devoured in their neighboring lair; as they had 
been waiting for days, for weeks, for months, 
through all this awful eternity of my imprison 
ment to drag my dead carcass to their feast. 

For two days no food was brought me, but 
then a new messenger appeared and my incarcera 
tion went on as before, but not again did I allow 
my reason to be submerged by the horror of my 
position. 

Shortly after this episode another prisoner was 

brought in and chained near me. By the dim 

torch light I saw that he was a red Martian and 

I could scarcely await the departure of his guards 

[210] 



BATTLING IN THE ARENA 

to address him. As their retreating footsteps died 
away in the distance, I called out softly the Mar 
tian word of greeting, kaor. 

"Who are you who speaks out of the dark 
ness ? " he answered. 

"John Carter, a friend of the red men of 
Helium." 

" I am of Helium," he said, " but I do not regall 
your name." 

And then I told him my story as I have written 
it here, omitting only any reference to my love for 
Dejah Thoris. He was much excited by the news 
of Helium's princess and seemed quite positive 
that she and Sola could easily have reached a point 
of safety from where they left me. He said that 
he knew the place well because the defile through 
which the Warhoon warriors had passed when 
they discovered us was the only one ever used by 
them when marching to the south. 

"Dejah Thoris and Sola entered the hills not 
five miles from a great waterway and are now 
probably quite safe," he assured me. 

My fellow prisoner was Kantos Kan, a padwar 

(lieutenant) in the navy of Helium. He had 

been a member of the ill-fated expedition which. 

had fallen into the hands of the Tharks at the 

fin] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



time of Dejah Thoris' capture, and he briefly 
related the events which followed the defeat of the 
battleships. 

Badly injured and only partially manned they 
had limped slowly toward Helium, but while 
passing near the city of Zodanga, the capital of 
Helium's hereditary enemies among the red men 
of Barsoom, they had been attacked by a great 
body of war vessels and all but the craft to which 
Kantos Kan belonged were either destroyed or 
captured. His vessel was chased for days by 
three of the Zodangan war ships but finally escaped 
during the darkness of a moonless night. 

Thirty days after the capture of Dejah Thoris, 
or about the time of our coming to Thark, his 
vessel had reached Helium with about ten sur 
vivors of the original crew of seven hundred 
officers and men. Immediately seven great fleets, 
each of one hundred mighty war ships, had been 
dispatched to search for Dejah Thoris, and from 
these vessels two thousand smaller craft had been 
kept out continuously in futile search for the 
missing princess. 

Two green Martian communities had been 
wiped off the face of Barsoom by the avenging 
fleets, but no trace of Dejah Thoris had been 
[212] 



BATTLING IN THE ARENA 

found. They had been searching among the 
northern hordes, and only within the past few 
days had they extended their quest to the south. 

Kantos Kan had been detailed to one of the 
small one man fliers and had had the misfortune 
to be discovered by the Warhoons while exploring 
their city. The bravery and daring of the man 
won my greatest respect and admiration. Alone 
he had landed at the city's boundary and on foot 
had penetrated to the buildings surrounding the 
plaza. For two days and nights he had explored 
their quarters and their dungeons in search of his 
beloved princess only to fall into the hands of 
a party of Warhoons as he was about to leave, 
after assuring himself that Dejah Thoris was not 
a captive there. 

During the period of our incarceration Kantos 
Kan and I became well acquainted, and formed a 
\wrrn personal friendship. A few days only 
elapsed, however, before we were dragged forth 
from our dungeon for the great games. We were 
conducted early one morning to an enormous 
amphitheater, which instead of having been built 
upon the surface of the ground was excavated 
below the surface. It had partially filled with 
debris so that how large it had originally been 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



was difficult to say. In its present condition it 
held the entire twenty thousand Warhoons of the 
assembled hordes. 

The arena was immense but 1 extremely uneven 
and unkempt. Around it the Warhoons had piled 
building stone from -some of the ruined edifices 
of the ancient city to prevent the animals and the 
captives from escaping into the audience, and at 
each end had been constructed cages to hold them 
until their turns came to meet some horrible death 
upon the arena. 

Kantos Kan and I were confined together in 
one of the cages. In the others were wild calots, 
thoats, mad zitidars, green warriors, and women 
of other hordes, and many strange and ferocious 
wild beasts of Barsoom which I had never before 
seen. The din of their roaring, growling and 
squealing was deafening and the formidable 
appearance of any one of them was enough to 
make the stoutest heart feel grave forebodings. 

Kantos Kan explained to me that at the end of 
the day one of these prisoners would gain freedom 
and the others would lie dead about the arena. 
The winners in the various contests of the day 
would be pitted against each other until only two 
remained alive; the victor in the last encounter 
["4] 



BATTLING IN THE ARENA 

being set free, whether animal or man. The fol 
lowing morning the cages would be filled with a 
new consignment of victims, and so on throughout 
the ten days of the games. 

Shortly after we had been caged the amphi 
theater began to fill and within an hour every 
available part of the seating space was occupied. 
Dak Kova, with his jeds and chieftains, sat at the 
center of one side of the arena upon a large raised 
platform. 

At a signal from Dak Kova the doors of two 
cages were thrown open and a dozen green Mar 
tian females were driven to the center of the arena. 
Each was given a dagger and then, at the far end, 
a pack of twelve calots, or wild dogs were loosed 
upon them. 

As the brutes, growling and foaming, rushed 
upon the almost defenseless women I turned my 
head that I might not see the horrid sight. The 
yells and laughter of the green horde bore witness 
to the excellent quality of the sport and when I 
turned back to the arena, as Kantos Kan told me 
it was over, I saw three victorious calots, snarling 
and growling over the bodies of their prey. The 
women had given a good account of themselves. 

Next a mad zitidar was loosed among the 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



remaining dogs, and so it went throughout the 
long, hot, horrible day. 

During the day I was pitted against first men 
and then beasts, but as I was armed with a longsword and always outclassed my adversary in 
agility and generally in strength as well, it proved 
but child's play to me. Time and time again I 
won the applause of the bloodthirsty multitude, 
and toward the end there were cries that I be 
taken from the arena and be made a member of 
the hordes of Warhoon. 

Finally there were but three of us left, a great 
green warrior of some far northern horde, Kantos 
Kan, and myself. The other two were to battle 
and then I to fight the conqueror for the liberty 
which was accorded the final winner. 

Kantos Kan had fought several times during 
the day and like myself had always proven vic 
torious, but occasionally by the smallest of margins, 
especially when pitted against the green warriors, 
I had little hope that he could best his giant adver 
sary who had mowed down all before him during 
the day. The fellow towered nearly sixteen feet 
in height, while Kantos Kan was some inches under 
six feet As they advanced to meet one another 
I saw for the first time a trick of Martian swords


BATTLING IN THE ARENA 

manship which centered Kantos Kan's every hope 
of victory and life on one cast of the dice, for, as 
he came to within about twenty feet of the huge 
fellow he threw his sword arm far behind him 
over his shoulder and with a mighty sweep hurled 
his weapon point foremost at the green warrior. 
It flew true as an arrow and piercing the poor 
devil's heart laid him dead upon the arena. 

Kantos Kan and I were now pitted against each 
other but as we approached to the encounter I 
whispered to him to prolong the battle until nearly 
dark in the hope that we might find some means 
of escape. The horde evidently guessed that we 
had no hearts to fight each other and so they 
howled in rage as neither of us placed a fatal 
thrust. Just as I saw the sudden coming of dark 
I whispered to Kantos Kan to thrust his sword 
between my left arm and my body. As he did 
so I staggered back clasping the sword tightly with 
my arm and thus fell to the ground with his 
weapon apparently protruding from my chest. 
Kantos Kan perceived my coup and stepping 
quickly to my side he placed his foot upon my 
neck and withdrawing his sword from my body 
gave me the final death blow through the neck 
wmch is supposed to sever the jugular vein, but 
[217] 



in this instance the cold blade slipped harmlessly 
into the sand of the arena. In the darkness which 
had now fallen none could tell but that he had 
really finished me. I whispered to him to go and 
claim his freedom and then look for me in the hills 
east of the city, and so he left me. 

When the amphitheater had cleared I crept 
stealthily to the top and as the great excavation 
lay far from the plaza and in an untenanted por 
tion of the great dead city I had little trouble in 
reaching the hills beyond. 



CHAPTER XX 

IN THE ATMOSPHERE FACTORY 

FOR two days I waited there for Kantos Kan, 
but as he did not come I started off on foot 
in a northwesterly direction toward a point 
where he had told me lay the nearest waterway. 
My only food consisted of vegetable milk from 
the plants which gave so bounteously of this price 
less fluid. 

Through two long weeks I wandered, stumbling 
through the nights guided only by the stars and 
hiding during the days behind some protruding 
rock or among the occasional hills I traversed. 
Several times I was attacked by wild beasts; 
strange, uncouth monstrosities that leaped upon 
me in the dark, so that I had ever to grasp my 
long-sword in my hand that I might be ready for 
them. Usually my strange, -newly acquired tele 
pathic power warned me in ample time, but once 
I was down with vicious fangs at my jugular and a 
hairy face pressed close to mine before I knew 
that I was even threatened. 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



What manner of thing was upon me I did not 
know, but that it was large and heavy and manylegged I could feel. My hands were at its throat 
before the fangs had a chance to bury themselves 
in my neck, and slowly I forced the hairy face 
from me and closed my fingers, vise-like, upon its 
windpipe. 

Without sound we lay there, the beast exerting 
every effort to reach me with those awful fangs, 
and I straining to maintain my grip and choke the 
life from it as I kept it from my throat. Slowly 
my arms gave to the unequal struggle, and inch by 
inch the burning eyes and gleaming tusks of my 
antagonist crept toward me, until, as the hairy face 
touched mine again, I realized that all was over. 
And then a living mass of destruction sprang from 
the surrounding darkness full upon the creature 
that held me pinioned to the ground. The two 
rolled growling upon the moss, tearing and rend 
ing one another in a frightful manner, but it was 
soon over and my preserver: stood with lowered 
head above the throat of the dead thing which 
would have killed me. 

The nearer moon, hurtling suddenly above 
the horizon and lighting up the Barsoomian 
scene, showed me that my preserver was Woola, 
[ 220] 



IN THE ATMOSPHERE FACTORY 

but from whence he had come, or how found me, 
I was at a loss to know. That I was glad of his 
companionship it is needless to say, but my pleasure 
at seeing him was tempered by anxiety as to the 
reason of his leaving Dejah Thoris. Only her 
death I felt sure, could account for his absence 
from her, so faithful I knew him to be to my 
commands. 

By the light of the now brilliant moons I saw 
that he was but a shadow of his former self, and 
as he turned from my caress and commenced 
greedily to devour the dead carcass at my feet I 
realized that the poor fellow was more than half 
starved. I, myself, was in but little better plight 
but I could not bring myself to eat the uncooked 
flesh and I had no means of making a fire. When 
Woola had finished his meal I again took up my 
weary and seemingly endless wandering in quest 
of the elusive waterway. 

At daybreak of the fifteenth day of my search 
I was overjoyed to see the high trees that denoted 
the object of my search. About noon I dragged 
myself wearily to the portals of a huge building 
which covered perhaps four square miles and 
towered two hundred feet in the air. It showed 
no aperture in the mighty walls other than the 
[221] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



tiny door at which I sank exhausted, nor was there 
any sign of life about it. 

I could find no bell or other method of making 
my presence known to the inmates of the place, 
unless a small round hole in the wall near the door 
was for that purpose. It was of about the bigness 
of a lead pencil and thinking that it might be in 
the nature of a speaking tube I put my mouth to 
it and was about to call into it when a voice issued 
from it asking me whom I might be, where from, 
and the nature of my errand. 

I explained that I had escaped from the Warhoons and was dying of starvation and exhaustion. 

"You wear the metal of a green warrior and 
are followed by a calot, yet you are of the figure 
of a red man. In color you are neither green nor 
red. In the name of the ninth day, what manner 
of creature are you?" 

"I am a friend of the red men of Barsoom 
and I am starving. In the name of humanity open 
to us," I replied. 

Presently the door commenced to recede before 
me until it had sunk into the wall fifty feet, then it 
stopped and slid easily to the left, exposing a short, 
narrow corridor of concrete, at the further end of 
which was another door, similar in every respect 
[222] 



IN THE ATMOSPHERE FACTORY 

to the one I had just passed. No one was in sight, 
yet immediately we passed the first door it slid 
gently into place behind us and receded rapidly to 
its original position in the front wall of the build 
ing. As the door had slipped aside I had noted its 
great thickness, fully twenty feet, and as it reached 
its place once more after closing behind us, great 
cylinders of steel had dropped from the ceiling 
behind it and fitted their lower ends into apertures 
countersunk in the floor. 

A second and a third door receded before me 
and slipped to one side as the first, before I reached 
a large inner chamber where I found food and 
drink set out upon a great stone table. A voice 
directed me to satisfy my hunger and to feed my 
calot, and while I was thus engaged my invisible 
host put me through a severe and searching crossexamination. 

"Your statements are most remarkable," said 
the voice, on concluding its questioning, "bat you 
are evidently speaking the truth, and it is equally 
evident that you are not of Barsoom. I can tell 
that by the conformation of your brain and the 
strange location of your internal organs and the 
shape and size of your heart." 

" Can you see through me ? " I exclaimed. 
[223] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



" Yes, I can see all but your thoughts, and were 
you a Barsoomian I could read those." 

Then a door opened at the far side of the 
chamber and a strange, dried up, little mummy of 
a man came toward me. He wore but a single 
article of clothing or adornment, a small collar of 
gold from which depended upon his chest a great 
ornament as large as a dinner plate set solid with 
huge diamonds, except for the exact center which 
was occupied by a strange stone, an inch in diam 
eter, that scintillated nine different and distinct 
rays; the seven colors of our earthly prism and 
two beautiful rays which, to me, were new and 
nameless. I cannot describe them any more than 
you could describe red to a blind man. I only 
know that they were beautiful in the extreme. 

The old man sat and talked with me for hours, 
and the strangest part of our intercourse was that 
I could read his every thought while he could not 
fathom an iota from my mind unless I spoke. 

I did not apprise him of my ability to sense his 
mental operations, and thus I learned a great deal 
which proved of immense value to me later and 
which I would never have known had he suspected 
my strange power, for the Martians have such 
perfect control of their mental machinery that they 
[224] 



IN THE ATMOSPHERE FACTORY 

are able to direct their thoughts with absolute 
precision. 

The building in which I found myself contained 
the machinery which produces that artificial atmos 
phere which sustains life on Mars. The secret of 
the entire process hinges on the use of the ninth 
ray, one of the beautiful scintillations which I had 
noted emanating from the great stone in my host's 
diadem. 

This ray is separated from the other rays of 
the sun by means of finely adjusted instruments 
placed upon the roof of the huge building, threequarters of which is used for reservoirs in which 
the ninth ray b stored. This product is then 
treated electrically, or rather certain proportions 
of refined electric vibrations are incorporated with 
it, and the result is then pumped to the five pitn'cipal air centers of the planet where, as it is re 
leased, contact with the ether of space transforms 
it into atmosphere. 

There is always sufficient reserve of the ninth 
ray stored in the great building to maintain the 
present Martian atmosphere for a thousand years, 
and the only fear, as my new friend told me, was 
that some accident might befall the pumping 
apparatus. 

[225] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



He led me to an inner chamber where I beheld 
a battery of twenty radium pumps any one of 
which was equal to the task of furnishing all Mars 
with the atmosphere compound. For eight 
hundred years, he told me, he had watched these 
pumps which are used alternately a day each at a 
stretch, or a little over twenty-four and one-half 
Earth hours. He has one assistant who divides 
the watch with him. Half a Martian year, about 
three hundred and forty-four of our days, each 
of these men spend alone in this huge, isolated 
plant. 

Erery red Martian is taught during earliest 
childhood the principles of the manufacture of 
atmosphere, but only two at one time ever hold 
the secret of ingress to the great building, which, 
built as it is with walls a hundred and fifty feet 
thick, is absolutely unassailable, even the roof 
being guarded from assault by air craft by a glass 
covering five feet thick. 

The only fear they entertain of attack is from 
the green Martians or some demented red man, 
as all Barsoomians realize that the very existence 
of every form of life on Mars is dependent upon 
the uninterrupted working of this plant. 

One curious fact I discovered as I watched his 
[226] 




THE OLD MAN SAT AND TALKED WITH ME FOR HOURS. 

Page 224 



IN THE ATMOSPHERE FACTORY 

thoughts was that the outer doors are manipulated 
by telepathic means. The locks are so finely 
adjusted that the doors are released by the action 
of a certain combination of thought waves. To 
experiment with my new-found toy I thought to 
surprise him into revealing this combination and 
so I asked him in a casual manner how he had 
managed to unlock the massive doors for me from 
the inner chambers of the building. As quick as 
a flash there leaped to his mind nine Martian 
sounds, but as quickly faded as he answered that 
this was a secret he must not divulge. 

From then on his manner toward me changed 
as though he feared that he had been surprised 
into divulging his great secret, and I read sus 
picion and fear in his looks and thoughts, though 
his words were still fair. 

Before I retired for the night he promised to 
give me a letter to a near-by agricultural officer 
who would help me on my way to Zodanga, which 
he said, was the nearest Martian city. 

" But be sure that you do not let them know 
you are bound for Helium as they are at war with 
that country. My assistant and I are of no 
country, we belong to all Barsoom and this talis 
man which we wear protects us in all lands, even 
[227] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



among the green men though we do not trust 
ourselves to their hands if we can avoid it," he 
added. 

" And so good-night, my friend," he continued, 
"may you have a long and restful sleep yes, a 
long sleep." 

And though he smiled pleasantly I saw in his 
thoughts the wish that he had never admitted me, 
and then a picture of him standing over me in the 
night, and the swift thrust of a long dagger and 
the half formed words, " I am sorry, but it is for 
the best good of Barsoom." 

As he closed the door of my chamber behind 
him his thoughts were cut off from me as was the 
sight of him, which seemed strange to me in my 
little knowledge of thought transference. 

What was I to do? How could I escape 
through these mighty walls? Easily could I kill 
him now that I was warned, but once he was dead 
I could no more escape, and with the stopping of 
the machinery of the great plant I should die with 
all the other inhabitants of the planet all, even 
Dejah Thoris were she not already dead. For 
the others I did not give the snap of my Snger, 
but the thought of Dejah Thoris drove from my 
mind all desire to kill my mistaken host. 
[228] 



IN THE ATMOSPHERE FACTORY 

Cautiously I openecl the door of my apartment 
and, followed by Woola, sought the inner of the 
great doors. A wild scheme had come to me; I 
would attempt to force the great locks by the nine 
thought waves I had read in my host's mind. 

Creeping stealthily through corridor after cor 
ridor and down winding runways which turned 
hither and thither I finally reached the great hall 
in which I had broken my long fast that morning. 
Nowhere had I seen my host, nor did I know 
where he kept himself by night. 

I was on the point of stepping boldly out into 
the room when a slight noise behind me warned 
me back into the shadows of a recess in the cor 
ridor. Dragging Woola after me I crouched low 
in the darkness. 

Presently the old man passed close by me, and 
as he entered the dimly lighted chamber which 
I had been about to pass through I saw that he 
held a long thin dagger in his hand and that he 
was sharpening it upon a stone. In his mind was 
the decision to inspect the radium pumps, which 
would take about thirty minutes, and then return 
to my bed chamber and finish me. 

As he passed through the great hall and disap 
peared down the runway which led to the pump[229] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



room, I stole stealthily from my hiding place and 
crossed to the great door, the inner of the three 
which stood between me and liberty. 

Concentrating my mind upon the massive lock 
I hurled the nine thought waves against it. In 
breathless expectancy I waited, when finally the 
great door moved softly toward me and slid quietly 
to one side. One after the other the remaining 
mighty portals opened at my command and Woola 
and I stepped forth into the darkness, free, but 
little better off than we had been before, other 
than that we had full stomachs. 

Hastening away from the shadows of the for 
midable pile I made for the first crossroad, intend 
ing to strike the central turnpike as quickly as 
possible. This I reached about morning and 
entering the first enclosure I came to I searched 
for some evidences of a habitation. 

There were low rambling buildings of concrete 
barred with heavy impassable doors, and no 
amount of hammering and hallooing brought any 
response. Weary and exhausted from sleepless 
ness I threw myself upon the ground commanding 
Woola to stand guard. 

Some time later I was awakened by his frightful 
growlings and opened my eyes to see three red 

[230] 



IN THE ATMOSPHERE FACTORY 

Martians standing a short distance from us and 
covering me with their rifles. 
I am unarmed and no enemy," I hastened to 
explain. " I have been a prisoner among the green 
men and am on my way to Zodanga. All I ask 
is food and rest for myself and my calot and the 
proper directions for reaching my destination." 

They lowered their rifles and advanced pleas 
antly toward me placing their right hands upon 
my left shoulder, after the manner of their custom 
of salute, and asking me many questions about 
myself and my wanderings. They then took me 
to the house of one of them which was only a 
short distance away. 

The buildings I had been hammering at in the 
early morning were occupied only by stock and 
farm produce, the house proper standing among a 
grove of enormous trees, and, like all red-Mar 
tian homes, had been raised at night some forty 
or fifty feet from the ground on a large round 
metal shaft which slid up or down within a sleeve 
sunk in the ground, and was operated by a tiny 
radium engine in the entrance hall of the buflding. 
Instead of bothering with bolts and bars for their 
dwellings, the red Martians simply run them up 
out of harm's way during the night. They also 
[231] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



have private means for lowering or raising them 
from the ground without if they wish to go away 
and leave them. 

These brothers, with their wives and children, ( 
occupied three similar houses on this farm. They 
did no work themselves, being government officers 
in charge. The labor was performed by convicts, 
prisoners of war, delinquent debtors and confirmed 
bachelors who were too poor to pay the high 
celibate tax which all red-Martian governments 
impose. 

They were the personification of cordiality and 
hospitality and I spent several days with them, 
resting and recuperating from my long and arduous 
experiences. 

When they had heard my story I omitted all 
reference to Dejah Thoris and the old man of the 
atmosphere plant they advised me to color my 
body to more nearly resemble their own race and 
then attempt to find employment in Zodanga, 
either in the army or the navy. 

"The chances are small that your tale will be 
believed until after you have proven your trust 
worthiness and won friends among the higher 
nobles of the court. This you can most easily do 
through military service, as we are a warlike 

[232] 



people on Barsoom," explained one of them, " and 
save our richest favors for the fighting man." 

When I was ready to depart they furnished nie 
with a small domestic bull thoat, such as is used 
for saddle purposes by all red Martians. The 
animal is about the size of a horse and quite gentle, 
but in color and shape an exact replica of his huge 
and fierce cousin of the wilds. 

The brothers had supplied me with a reddish 
oil with which I anointed my entire body and one 
of them cut my hair, which had grown quite long, 
in the prevailing fashion of the time, square at the 
back and banged in front, so that I could have 
passed anywhere upon Barsoom as a full-fledged 
red Martian. My metal and ornaments were also 
renewed in the style of a Zodangan gentleman, 
attached to the house of Ptor, which was the 
family name of my benefactors. 

They filled a little sack at my side with Zodangan 
money. The medium of exchange upon Mars is 
not dissimilar from our own except that the coins 
are oval. Paper money is issued by individuals 
as they require it and redeemed twice yearly. If 
a man issues more than he can redeem, the govern 
ment pays his creditors in full and the debtor 
works out the amount upon the farms or in mines, 
[233] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



which are all owned by the government. ' This 
suits everybody except the debtor as it has been 
a difficult thing to obtain sufficient voluntary labor 
to work the great isolated farm lands of Mars, 
stretching as they do like narrow ribbons from 
pole to pole, through wild stretches peopled by 
wild animals and wilder men. 

When I mentioned my inability to repay them 
for their kindness to me they assured me that I 
would have ample opportunity if I lived long upon 
Barsoom, and bidding me farewell they watched 
me until I was out of sight upon the broad white 
turnpike. 



34l 



A s 



CHAPTER XXI 

AN AIR SCOUT FOR ZODANGA 

S I proceeded on my journey toward Zodanga 



many strange and interesting sights arrested 
my attention, and at the several farm houses where 
I stopped I learned a number of new and instruc 
tive things concerning the methods and manners 
of Barsoom. 

The water which supplies the farms of Mars 
is collected in immense underground reservoirs at 
either pole from the melting ice caps, and pumped 
through long conduits to the various populated 
centers. Along either side of these conduits, and 
extending their entire length, lie the cultivated dis 
tricts. These are divided into tracts of about the 
same size, each tract being under the supervision 
of one or more government officers. 

Instead of flooding the surface of the fields, and 
thus wasting immense quantities of water by evap 
oration, the precious liquid is carried underground 
through a vast network of small pipes directly to 
the roots of the vegetation. The crops upon Marf 

[235] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



are always uniform, for there are no droughts, no 
rains, no high winds, and no insects, or destroying 
birds. 

On this trip I tasted the first meat I had eaten 
since leaving Earth large, juicy steaks and chops 
from the well fed domestic animals of the farms. 
Also I enjoyed luscious fruits and vegetables, but 

not a single article of food which was exactly simJL 

ilar to anything on Earth. Every plant and flower 
and vegetable and animal has been so re6ned by 
ages of careful, scientific cultivation and breeding 
that the like of them on Earth dwindled into pale, 
gray, characterless nothingness by comparison. 

At a second stop I met some highly cultivated 
people of the noble class and while in conversation 
we chanced to speak of Helium. One of the older 
men had been there on a diplomatic mission several 
years before and spoke with regret of the condi 
tions which seemed destined ever to keep these two 
countries at war. 

"Helium," he said, "rightly boasts the most 
beautiful women of Barsoom, and of all her 
treasures the wondrous daughter of Mors Kajak, 
Dejah Thoris, is the most exquisite flower. 

"Why," he added, "the people really worship 
the ground she walks upon and since her loss on 
[236] 



AN AIR SCOUT FOR ZODANGA 

that ill-starred expedition all Helium has been 
draped in mourning. 

" That our ruler should have attacked the dis 
abled fleet as it was returning to Helium was but 
another of his awful blunders which I fear will 
sooner or later compel Zodanga to elevate a 
wiser man to his place. 

"Even now, though our victorious armies are 
surrounding Helium, the people of Zodanga are 
voicing their displeasure, for the war is not a 
popular one, since it is not based on right or jus 
tice. Our forces took advantage of the absence 
of the principal fleet of Hefium on their search 
for the princess, and so we have been able easily 
to reduce the city to a sorry plight. It is said she 
will fall within the next few passages of the 
further moon." 

"And what, think you, may have been the fate 
of the princess, Dejah Thoris?" I asked as 
casually as possible. 

" She is dead," he answered. "This much was 
learned from a green warrior recently captured 
by our forces in the south. She escaped from the 
hordes of Thark with a strange creature of another 
world, only to fall into the hands of the Warhoons. 
Their thoats were found wandering upon the 

[237] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



bottom and evidences of a bloody conflict were 
discovered near-by." 

While this information was in no way reassur 
ing, neither was it at all conclusive proof of the 
death of Dejah Thoris, and so I determined to 
make every effort possible to reach Helium as 
quickly as I could and carry to Tardos Mors such 
news of his granddaughter's possible whereabouts 
as lay in my power. 

Ten days after leaving the three Ptor brothers 
I arrived at Zodanga. From the moment that I 
had come in contact with the red inhabitants of 
Mars I had noticed that Woola drew a great 
amount of unwelcome attention to me, since the 
huge brute belonged to a species which is never 
domesticated by the red men. Were one to stroll 
down Broadway with a Numidian lion at his heels 
the effect would be somewhat similar to that which 
I should have produced had I entered Zodanga 
with Woola. 

The very thought of parting with the faithful 
fellow caused me so great regret and genuine sor 
row that I put it off until just before we arrived at 
the city's gates ; but then, finally, it became impera 
tive that we separate. Had nothing further than 
my own safety or pleasure been at stake no argu[238] 



ment could have prevailed upon me to turn 
the one creature upon Barsoom that had never 
failed in a demonstration of affection and loyalty; 
but as I would willingly have offered my life in 
the service of her in search of whom I was about 
to challenge the unknown dangers of this, to me, 
mysterious city, I could not permit even Woola's 
life to threaten the success of my venture, much 
less his momentary happiness, for I doubted not 
he soon would forget me. And so I bade the poor 
beast an affectionate farewell, promising him, 
however, that if I came through my adventure in 
safety that in some way I should find the means to 
search him out. 

He seemed to understand me fully, and when I 
pointed back in the direction of Thark he turned 
sorrowfully away, nor could I bear to watch him 
go; but resolutely set my face toward Zodanga 
and with a touch of heartsickness approached her. 
frowning walls. 

The letter I bore from them gained me imme 
diate entrance to the vast, walled city. It was 
still very early in the morning and the streets 
were practically deserted. The residences, raised 
high upon their metal columns, resembled huge 
rookeries, while the uprights themselves presented 

[239] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



the appearance of steel tree trunks. The shops 
as a rule were not raised from the ground nor 
were their doors bolted or barred, since thievery 
is practically unknown upon Barsoom. Assassina 
tion is the ever present fear of all Barsoomians, 
and for this reason alone their homes are raised 
high above the ground at night, or in times of 
danger. 

The Ptor brothers had given me explicit direc 
tions for reaching the point of the city where I 
could find living accommodations and be near the 
offices of the government agents to whom they 
had given me letters. My way led to the central 
square or plaza, which is a characteristic of all 
Martian cities. 

The plaza of Zodanga covers a square mile and 
is bounded by the palaces of the jeddak, the jeds, 
and other members of the royalty and nobility of 
Zodanga, as well as by the principal public build 
ings, cafes, and shops. 

As I was crossing the great square lost in wonder 
and admiration of the magnificent architecture 
and the gorgeous scarlet vegetation which carpeted 
the broad lawns I discovered a red Martian walk 
ing briskly toward me from one of the avenues. 
He paid not the slightest attention to me, but as 
[240] 



AN AIR SCOUT FOR ZODANGA 

he came abreast I recognized him, and turning I 
placed my hand upon his shoulder, calling out : 

"Kaor, KantosKan!" 

Like lightning he wheeled and before I could 
so much as lower my hand the point of his longsword was at my breast. 

"Who are you?" he growled, and then as- a 
backward leap carried me fifty feet from his sword 
he dropped the point to the ground and exclaimed, 
laughing, 

" I do not need a better reply, there is but one 
man upon all Barsoom who can bounce about Kke 
a rubber ball. By the mother of the further moon, 
John Carter, how came you here, and have you 
become a Darseen that you can change your color 
at will ? 

" You gave me a bad half minute my friend," 
he continued, after I had briefly outlined my adven 
tures since parting with him in the arena at Warhoorv. "Were my name and city known to the 
Zodangans I would shortly be sitting on the banks 



of the lost sea of Korus with my revered 
departed ancestors. I am here in the interests of 
Tardos Mors, Jeddak of Helium, to discover the 
whereabouts of Dejah Thoris, oair princess. Sab 
Than, prince of Zodanga, has her hidden in the 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



rity and has fallen madly in love with her. His 
father, Than Kosis, Jeddak of Zodanga, has made 
her voluntary marriage to his son the price of 
peace between our countries, but Tardos Mors 
will not accede to the demands and has sent word 
that he and his people would rather look upon the 
dead face of their princess than see her wed to 
any than her own choice, and that personally he 
would prefer being engulfed in the ashes of a lost 
and burning Helium to joining the metal of his 
house with that of Than Kosis. His reply was 
the deadliest affront he could have put upon Than 
Kosis and the Zodangans, but his people love him 
the more for it and his strength in Helium is 
greater today than ever. 

" I have been here three days," continued Kantos Kan, "but I have not yet found where Dejah 
Thoris is imprisoned. Today I join the Zodangan 
navy as an air scout and I hope in this way to win 
the confidence of Sab Than, the prince, who is 
commander of this division of the navy, and thus 
learn the whereabouts of Dejah Thoris. I am 
glad that you are here, John Carter, for I know 
your loyalty to my princess and two of us working 
together should be able to accomplish much." 

The plaza was now commencing to fill with 
[242] 



AN AIR SCOUT FOR ZODANGA 

.--11 H ' 'I " II. .1 Illl .Mil I Q 

people going and coming upon the daily activities 
of their duties. The shops were opening and the 
cafes filling with early morning patrons. Kantos 
Kan led me to one of these gorgeous eating places 
where we were served entirely by mechanical appa 
ratus. No hand touched the food from the time 
it entered the building in its raw state until it 
emerged hot and delicious upon the tables before 
the guests, in response to the touching of tiny 
buttons to indicate their desires. 

After our meal, Kantos Kan took me with him 
to the headquarters of the air-scout squadron and 
introducing me to his superior asked that I be 
enrolled as a member of the corps. In accord 
ance with custom an examination was necessary, 
but Kantos Kan had told me to have no fear on 
this score as he would attend to that part of the 
matter. He accomplished this by taking my order 
for examination to the examining officer and repre 
senting himself as John Carter. 

"This ruse will be discovered later," he cheer 
fully explained, " when they check up my weights, 
measurements, and other personal identification 
data, but it will be several months before this is 
done and our mission should be accomplished or 
have failed long before that time." 
[243] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



The next few days were spent by Kantos Kan 
in teaching me the intricacies of flying and of 
repairing the dainty little contrivances which the 
Martians use for this purpose. The body of the 
one-man air craft is about sixteen feet long, two 
feet wide and three inches thick, tapering to a 
point at each end. The driver sits on top of this 
plane upon a seat constructed over the small, noise 
less radium engine which propels it. The medium 
of buoyancy is contained within the thin metal 
walls of the body and consists of the eighth Barsoomian ray, or ray of propulsion, as it may be 
termed in view of its properties. 

This ray, like the ninth ray, is unknown on 
Earth, but the Martians have discovered that it is 
an inherent property of all light no matter from 
what source it emanates. They have learned that 
it is the solar eighth ray which propels the light 
of the sun to the various planets, and that it is 
the individual eighth ray of each planet which 
" reflects," or propels the light thus obtained out 
into space once more. The solar eighth ray would 
be absorbed by the surface of Barsoom, but the 
Barsoomian eighth ray, which tends to propel light 
from Mars into space, is constantly streaming out 
from the planet constituting a force of repulsion 
[244] 



AN AIR SCOUT FOR ZODANGA 

of gravity which when confined is able to lift enor 
mous weights from the surface of the ground. 

It is this ray which has enabled them to so per 
fect aviation that battle ships far outweighing any 
thing known upon Earth sail as gracefully and 
lightly through the thin air of Barsoom as a toy 
balloon in the heavy atmosphere of Earth. 

During the early years of the discovery of this 
ray many strange accidents occurred before the 
Martians learned to measure and control the won 
derful power they had found. In one instance, 
some nine hundred years before, the first great 
battle ship to be built with eighth ray reservoirs 
was stored with too great a quantity of the rays 
and she had sailed up from Helium with five 
hundred officers and men, never to return. 

Her power of repulsion for the planet was so 
great that it had carried her far into space, where 
she can be seen today, by the aid of powerful tele 
scopes, hurtling through the heavens ten thousand 
miles from Mars; a tiny satellite that will thus 
encircle Barsoom to the end of time. 

The fourth day after my arrival at Zodanga 
I made my first flight, and as a result of it I won 
a promotion which included quarters in the palace 
of Than Kosis. 

T245] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



As I rose above the city I circled several times, 
as I had seen Kantos Kan do, and then throwing 
my engine into top speed I raced at terrific velocity 
toward the south, following one of the great water 
ways which enter Zodanga from that direction. 

I had traversed perhaps two hundred miles 
in a little less than an hour when I descried far 
below me a party of three green warriors racing 
madly toward a small figure on foot which seemed 
to be trying to reach the confines of one of the 
walled fields. 

Dropping my machine rapidly toward them, 
and circling to the rear of the warriors, I soon 
saw that the object of their pursuit was a red 
Martian wearing the metal of the scout squadron 
to which I was attached. A short distance away 
lay his tiny flier, surrounded by the tools with 
which he had evidently been occupied in repairing 
some damage when surprised by the green 
warriors. 

They were now almost upon him; their flying 
mounts charging down on the relatively puny figure 
at terrific speed, while the warriors leaned low 
to the right, with their great metal-shod spears. 
Each seemed striving to be the first to impale the 
poor Zodangan and in another moment his fate 
[246] 



AN AIR SCOUT FOR ZODANGA 

would have been sealed had it not been for my 
timely arrival. 

Driving my fleet air craft at high speed directly 
behind the warriors I soon overtook them and 
without diminishing my speed I rammed the prow 
of my little Hier between the shoulders of the 
nearest. The impact sufficient to have torn through 
inches of solid steel, hurled the fellow's headless 
body into the air over the head of his thoat, where 
it fell sprawling upon the moss. The mounts of 
the other two warriors turned squealing in terror, 
and bolted in opposite directions. 

Reducing my speed I circled and came to the 
ground at the feet of the astonished Zodangan. 
He was warm in his thanks for my timely aid and 
promised that my day's work would bring the 
reward it merited, for it was none other than a 
cousin of the jeddak of Zodanga whose life I had 
saved. 

We wasted no time in talk as we knew that the 
warriors would surely return as soon as they had 
gained control of their mounts. Hastening to his 
damaged machine we were bending every effort to 
finish the needed repairs and had almost completed 
them when we saw the two green monsters return 
ing at top speed from opposite sides of us. When 

[247] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



they had approached within a hundred yards their 
thoats again became unmanageable and absolutely 
refused to advance further toward the air craft 
which had frightened them. 

The warriors finally dismounted and hobbling 
their animals advanced toward us on foot with 
drawn long-swords. I advanced to meet the 
larger, telling the Zodangan to do the best he could 
with the other. Finishing my man with almost 
no effort, as had now from much practice become 
habitual with me, I hastened to return to my new 
acquaintance whom I found indeed in desperate 
straits. 

He was wounded and down with the huge foot 
of his antagonist upon his throat and the great 
long-sword raised to deal the final thrust. With 
a bound I cleared the fifty feet intervening between 
us, and with out-stretched point drove my sword 
completely through the body of the green warrior. 
His sword fell, harmless, to the ground and he 
sank limply upon the prostrate form of the 
Zodangan. 

A cursory examination of the latter revealed no 

mortal injuries and after a brief rest he asserted 

that he felt fit to attempt the return voyage. He 

would have to pilot his own craft, however, as 

[248] 



AIR SCOUT FOR ZODANGA 



these frail vessels are not intended to convey but 
a single person. 

Quickly completing the repairs we rose together 
into the still, cloudless Martian sky, and at great 
speed and without further mishap returned to 
Zodanga. 

As we neared the city we discovered a mighty 
concourse of civilians and troops assembled upon 
the plain before the city. The sky was black with 
naval vessels and private and public pleasure craft, 
flying long streamers of gay-colored silks, and ban 
ners and flags of odd and picturesque design. 

My companion signaled that I slow down, and 
running his machine close beside mine suggested 
that we approach and watch the ceremony, which, 
he said, was for the. purpose of conferring honors 
on individual officers and men for bravery and 
other distinguished service. He then unfurled a 
little ensign which denoted that his craft bore a 
member of the royal family of Zodanga, and 
together we made our way through the maze of 
low-lying air vessels until we hung directly over 
the jeddak of Zodanga and his staff. All were 
mounted upon the small domestic bull thoats of the 
red Martians, and their trappings and ornamenta 
tion bore such a quantity of gorgeously colored 
[249] 



'A PRINCESS OF MARS 



feathers that I could not but be struck with the 
startling resemblance the concourse bore to a band 
of the red Indians of my own Earth. 

One of the staff called the attention of Than 
Kosis to the presence of my companion above 
them and the ruler motioned for him to descend. 
As they waited for the troops to move into posi 
tion facing the jeddak the two talked earnestly 
together, the jeddak and his staff occasionally 
glancing up at me. I could not hear their conver 
sation and presently it ceased and all dismounted, 
as the last body of troops had wheeled into posi 
tion before their emperor. A member of the staff 
advanced toward the troops, and calling the name 
of a soldier commanded him to advance. The 
officer then recited the nature of the heroic act 
which had won the approval of the jeddak, and 
the latter advanced and placed a metal ornament 
upon the left arm of the lucky man. 

Ten men had been so decorated when the aid 
called out, 

"John Carter, air scout!" 

Never in my life had I been so surprised, but 

the habit of military discipline is strong within me, 

and I dropped my little machine lightly to the 

ground and advanced on foot as I had seen the 

[250] 



others do. As I halted before the officer, he 
addressed me in a voice audible to the entire 
assemblage of troops and spectators. 

"In recognition, John Carter," he said, "of 
your remarkable courage and skill in defending 
the person of the cousin of the jeddak Than Kosis 
and, single-handed, vanquishing three green war 
riors, it is the pleasure of our jeddak to confer 
on you the mark of his esteem." 

Than Kosis then advanced toward me and plac 
ing an ornament upon me, said: 

" My cousin has narrated the details of your 
wonderful achievement, which seems little short 
of miraculous, and if you can so well defend a 
cousin of the jeddak how much better could you 
defend the person of the jeddak himself. You are 
therefore appointed a padwar of The Guards and 
will be quartered in my palace hereafter." 

I thanked him, and at his direction joined the 
members of his staff. After the ceremony I 
returned my machine to its quarters on the roof 
of the barracks of the air-scout squadron, and 
with an orderly from the palace to guide me I 
reported to the officer in charge of the palace. 



CHAPTER XXII 

I FIND DEJAH 

THE major-domo to whom I reported had 
been given instructions to station me near 
the person of the jeddak, who, in time of war, is 
always in great danger of assassination, as the 
rule that all is fair in war seems to constitute the 
entire ethics of Martian conflict. 

He therefore escorted me immediately to the 
apartment in which Than Kosis then was. The 
ruler was engaged in conversation with his son, 
Sab Than, and several courtiers of his household, 
and did not perceive my entrance. 

The walls of the apartment were completely 
hung with splendid tapestries which hid any win 
dows or doors which may have pierced them. The 
room was lighted by imprisoned rays of sunshine 
held between the ceiling proper and what appeared 
to be a ground glass false ceiling a few inches 
below. 

My guide drew aside one of the tapestries, dis 
closing a passage which encircled the room, 

[252] 



 FIND DEJAH 



between the hangings and the walls of the cham 
ber. Within this passage I was to remain, he 
said, so long as Than Kosis was in the apartment. 
When he left I was to follow. My only duty 
was to guard the ruler and keep out of sight as 
much as possible. I would be relieved after a 
period of four hours. The major-domo then 
left me. 

The tapestries were of a strange weaving which 
gave the appearance of heavy solidity from one 
side, but from my hiding place I could perceive 
all that took place within the room as readily as 
though there had been no curtain intervening. 

Scarcely had I gained my post than the tapestry 
at the opposite end of the chamber separated and 
four soldiers of The Guard entered, surrounding 
a female figure. As they approached Than Kosis 
the soldiers fell to either side and there standing 
before the jeddak and not ten feet from me, her 
beautiful face radiant with smiles, was Dejah 
Thoris . 

Sab Than, Prince of Zodanga, advanced to meet 
her, and hand in hand they approached close to 
the jeddak. Than Kosis looked up in surprise, 
and, rising, saluted her. 

"To what strange freak do I owe this visit 
[253] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



from the Princess of Helium, who, two days ago, 
with rare consideration for my pride, assured me 
that she would prefer Tal Hajus, the green Thark, 
to my son ? " 

Dejah Thoris only smiled the more and with 
the roguish dimples playing at the corners of her 
mouth she made answer : 

" From the beginning of time upon Barsoom it 
has been the prerogative of woman to change her 
mind as she listed and to dissemble in matters con 
cerning her heart. That you will forgive, Than 
Kosis, as has your son. Two days ago I was not 
sure of his love for me, but now I am, and I have 
come to beg of you to forget my rash words and 
to accept the assurance of the Princess of Helium 
that when the time comes she will wed Sab Than, 
Prince of Zodanga." 

" I am glad that you have so decided," replied 
Than Kosis. "It is far from my desire to push 
war further against the people of Helium, and, 
iyour promise shall be recorded and a proclamation 
to my people issued forthwith." 

" It were better, Than Kosis," interrupted 
Dejah Thoris, "that the proclamation wait the 
ending of this war. It would look strange indeed 
to my people and to yours were the Princess of 

[254] 



 FIND DEJAH 



Helium to give herself to her country's enemy in 
the midst of hostilities." 

"Cannot the war be ended at once?" spoke 
Sab Than. "It requires but the word of Than 
Kosis to bring peace. Say it my father, say the 
word that will hasten my happiness, and end this 
unpopular strife." 

"We shall see," replied Than Kosis, "how the 
people of Helium take to peace. I shall at least 
offer it to them." 

Dejah Thoris, after a few words, turned and 
left the apartment, still followed by her guards. 

Thus was the edifice of my brief dream of 
happiness dashed, broken, to the ground of reality. 
The woman for whom I had offered my life, and 
from whose lips I haH so recently heard a declara 
tion of love for me, had lightly forgotten my very 
existence and smilingly given herself to the son of 
her people's most hated enemy. 

Although I had heard it with my own ears I 
could not believe it. I must search out her apart 
ments and force her to repeat the cruel truth to 
me alone before I would be convinced, and so I 
deserted my post and hastened through the pas 
sage behind the tapestries toward the door by 
which she had left the chamber. Slipping quietly 

[255] 



'A PRINCESS OF MARS 



through this opening I discovered a maze of wind 
ing corridors, branching and turning in every 
direction. 

Running rapidly down first one and then another 
of them I soon became hopelessly lost and was 
standing panting against a side wall when I heard 
voices near me. Apparently they were coming 
from the opposite side of the partition against 
which I leaned and presently I made out the tones 
of Dejah Thoris. I could not hear the words but 
I knew that I could not possibly be mistaken in 
the voice. 

Moving on a few steps I discovered another 
passage-way at the end of which lay a door. 
Walking boldly forward I pushed into the room 
only to find myself in a small ante chamber in 
which were the four guards who had accompanied 
her. One of them instantly arose and accosted 
me, asking the nature of my business. 

" I am from Than Kosis," I replied, " and wish 
to speak privately with Dejah Thoris, Princess of 
Helium." 

"And your order?" asked the fellow. 

I did not know what he meant, but replied that 
I was a member of The Guard, and without wait 
ing for a reply from him I strode toward the 

[256] 



I FIND DEJAH 



opposite door of the ante chamber, behind which 
I could hear Dejah Thoris conversing. 

But my entrance was not to be so easily accom 
plished. The guardsman stepped before me, 
saying, 

" No one comes from Than Kosis without carry 
ing an order or the pass word. You must give 
me one or the other before you may pass." 

"The only order I require, my friend, to enter 
where I will, hangs at my side," I answered, tap 
ping my long-sword ; " will you let me pass in peace 
or no?" 

For reply he whipped out his own sword, call 
ing to the others to join him, and thus the four 
stood, with drawn weapons, barring my further 
progress. 

" You are not here by the order of Than Kosis," 
cried the one who had first addressed me, " and 
not only s'hall you not enter the apartments of the 
Princess of Helium but you shall go back to Than 
Kosis under guard to explain this unwarranted 
temerity. Throw down your sword; you cannot 
hope to overcome four of us," he added with a 
grim smile. 

My reply was a quick thrust which left me but 
three antagonists and I can assure you that they 
[257] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



were worthy of my metal. They had me backed 
against the wall in no time, fighting for my life. 
Slowly I worked my way to a corner of the room 
where I could force them to come at me only one 
( at a time, and thus we fought upward of twenty 
minutes; the clanging of steel on steel producing 
a veritable bedlam in the little room. 

The noise had brought Dejah Thoris to the 
door of her apartment, and there she stood 
throughout the conflict with Sola at her back peer 
ing over her shoulder. Her face was set and 
emotionless and I knew that she did not recognize 
me, nor did Sola. 

Finally a lucky cut brought down a second 
guardsman and then, with only two opposing me, 
I changed my tactics and rushed them down after 
the fashion of my fighting that had won me many 
a victory. The third fell within ten seconds after 
the second, and the last lay dead upon the bloody 
floor a few moments later. They were brave men 
and noble fighters, and it grieved me that I had 
been forced to kill them, but I would have will 
ingly depopulated all Barsoom could I have 
reached the side of my Dejah Thoris in no other 
way. 

Sheathing my bloody blade I advanced toward 

[258] 



 FIND DEJAH 



my Martian Princess, who still stood mutely 
gazing at me without sign of recognition. 

"Who are you, Zodangan?" she whispered. 
"Another enemy to harass me in my misery?" 

" I am a friend," I answered, " a once cherished 
friend." 

"No friend of Helium's princess wears that 
metal," she replied, " and yet the voice ! I have 
heard it before; it is not it cannot be no, 
for he is dead." 

"It is, though, my Princess, none other than 
John Carter," I said. "Do you not recognize, 
even through paint and strange metal, the heart 
of your chieftain?" 

As I came close to her she swayed toward me 
with outstretched hands, but as I reached to take 
her in my arms she drew back with a shudder and 
a little moan of misery. 

"Too late, too late," she grieved. "O my 
chieftain that was, and whom I thought dead, had 
you but returned one little hour before but now 
it is too late, too late." 

s "What do you mean, Dejah Thoris?" I cried. 
"That you would not have promised yourself to 
tfce Zodangan prince had you known that I 
lived?" 

[259] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



"Think you, John Carter, that I would give my 
heart to you yesterday and today to another? I 
thought that it lay buried with your ashes in the 
pits of Warhoon, and so today I have promised 
my body to another to save my people from the 
curse of a victorious Zodangan army." 

" But I am not dead, my princess. I have come 
to claim you, and all Zodanga cannot prevent it." 

" It is too late, John Carter, my promise is 
given, and on Barsoom that is final. The cere 
monies which follow later are but meaningless 
formalities. They make the fact of marriage no 
more certain than does the funeral cortege of a 
jeddak again place the seal of death upon him. 
I am as good as married, John Carter. No longer 
may you call me your princess. No longer are you 
my chieftain." 

" I know but little of your customs here upon 
Barsoom, Dejah Thoris, but I do know that I 
love you, and if you meant the last words you 
spoke to me that day as the hordes of Warhooi\ 
were charging down upon us, no other man shall 
ever claim you as his bride. You meant them then, 
my princess, and you mean them still! Say that 
it is true." 

"I meant them, John Carter," she whispered 
[260] 



 FIND DEJAH 



"I cannot repeat them now for I have given 
myself to another. Ah, if you had only known 
our ways, my friend," she continued, half to herself, "the promise would have been yours long 
months ago, and you could have claimed me before 
all others. It might have meant the fall of 
Helium, but I would have given my empire for 
my Tharkian chief." 

Then aloud she said: "Do you remember the 
night when you offended me ? You called me your 
princess without having asked my hand of me, 
and then you boasted that you had fought for me. 
You did not know, and I should not have been 
offended; I see that now. But there was no one 
to tell you, what I could not, that upon Barsoom 
there are two kinds of women in the cities of the 
red men. The one they fight for that they may 
ask them in marriage; the other kind they fight 
for also, but never ask their hands. When a man 
has won a woman he may address her as his prin 
cess, or in any of the several terms which signify 
possession. You had fought for me, but had 
never asked me in marriage, and so when you 
called me your princess, you see," she faltered, " I 
was hurt, but even then, John Carter, I did not 
repulse you, as I should have done, until you made 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



it doably worse by taunting me with having won 
me through combat." 

" I do not need ask your forgiveness now, Dejah 
Thoris," I cried. " You must know that my fault 
was of ignorance of your Barsoomian customs. 
What I failed to do, through implicit belief that 
my petition would be presumptious and unwel 
come, I do now, Dejah Thoris; I ask you to be 
my wife, and by all the Virginian fighting blood 
that flows in my veins you shall be." 

"No, John Carter, it is useless," she cried, 
hopelessly, " I may never be yours while Sab Than 
lives." 

"You have sealed his death warrant, my prin 
cess Sab Than dies." 

" Nor that either," she hastened to explain. " I 
may not wed the man who slays my husband, even 
in self-defense. It is custom. We are ruled by 
custom upon Barsoom. It is useless, my friend. 
You must bear the sorrow with me. That at least 
we may share in common. That, and the mem'ory of the brief days among the Tharks. You 
must go now, nor ever see me again. Good-bye, 
my chieftain that was." 

Disheartened and dejected, I withdrew from the 
room, but I was not entirely discouraged, nor 
[262] 



I FIND DEJAH 



would I admit that Dejah Thoris was lost to me 
until the ceremony had actually been performed. 

As I wandered along the corridors, I was as 
absolutely lost in the mazes of winding passage 
ways as I had been before I discovered Dejah 
Thoris' apartments. 

I knew that my only hope lay in escape from 
the city of Zodanga, for the matter of the four 
dead guardsmen would have to be explained, and 
as I could never reach my original post without 
a guide, suspicion would surely rest on me so soon 
as I was discovered wandering aimlessly through 
the palace. 

Presently I came upon a spiral runway leading 
to a lower floor, and this I followed downward 
for several stories until I reached the doorway 
of a large apartment in which were a number of 
guardsmen. The walls of this room were hung 
with transparent tapestries behind which I 
secreted myself without being apprehended. 

The conversation of the guardsmen was general, 
and awakened no interest in me until an officer 
entered the room and ordered four of the men to 
relieve the detail who were guarding the Princess 
of Helium. Now, I knew, my troubles would 
commence in earnest and indeed they were upon 
[263] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



me all too soon, for it seemed that the squad 
had scarcely left the guardroom before one of 
their number burst in again breathlessly, crying 
that they had found their four comrades butchered 
in the ante-chamber. 

In a moment the entire palace was alive with 
people. Guardsmen, officers, courtiers, servants, 
and slaves ran helter skelter through the corridors 
and apartments carrying messages and orders, and 
searching for signs of the assassin. 

This was my opportunity and slim as it appeared 
I grasped it, for as a number of soldiers came 
hurrying past my hiding place I fell in behind them 
and followed through the mazes of the palace 
until, in passing through a great hall, I saw the 
blessed light of day coming in through a series qf 
larger windows. 

Here I left my guides, and, slipping to the near 
est window, sought for an avenue of escape. The 
windows opened upon a great balcony which over 
looked one of the broad avenues of Zodanga. 
The ground was about thirty feet below, and at a 
like distance from the building was a wall fully 
twenty feet high, constructed of polished glass 
about a foot in thickness. To a red Martian 
escape by this path would have appeared impos
[264] 



 FIND DEJAH 



sible, but to me, with my earthly strength and 
agility, it seemed already accomplished. My only 
fear was in being detected before darkness fell, 
for I could not make the leap in broad daylight 
while the court below and the avenue beyond were 
crowded with Zodangans. 

Accordingly I searched for a hiding place and 
finally found one by accident, inside a huge hang 
ing ornament which swung from the ceiling of the 
hall, and about ten feet from the floor. Into the 
capacious bowl-like vase I sprang with ease, and 
scarcely had I settled down within it than I heard 
a number of people enter the apartment. The 
group stopped beneath my hiding place and I 
could plainly overhear their every word. 

" It is the work of Heliumites," said one of the 
men. 

"Yes, O Jeddak, but how had they access to 
the palace? I could believe that even with the dil 
igent care of your guardsmen a single enemy might 
reach the inner chambers, but how a force of six 
or eight fighting men could have done so unob 
served is beyond me. We shall soon know, how 
ever, for here comes the royal psychologist." 

Another man now joined the group, and, after 
making his formal greetings to his ruler, said: 

[2653 



"O mighty Jeddak, it is a strange tale I read 
in the dead minds of your faithful guardsmen. 
They were felled not by a number of fighting men, 
but by a single opponent." 

He paused to let the full weight of this announce 
ment impress his hearers, and that his statement 
was scarcely credited was evidenced by the impa 
tient exclamation of incredulity which escaped the 
lips of Than Kosis. 

" What manner of weird tale are you bringing 
me, Notan?" he cried. 

" It is the truth, my Jeddak," replied the psy 
chologist. " In fact the impressions were strongly 
marked on the brain of each of the four guards 
men. Their antagonist was a very tall man, wear 
ing the metal of one of your own guardsmen, and 
his fighting ability was little short of marvelous 
for he fought fair against the entire four and van 
quished them by his surpassing skill and super 
human strength and endurance. Though he wore 
the metal of Zodanga, my Jeddak, such a man 
was never seen before in this or any other country 
upon Barsoom. 

"The mind of the Princess of Helium whom 
I have examined and questioned was a blank to 
me, she has perfect control, and I could not read 
[266] 



I FIND DEJAH 



one iota of it. She said that she witnessed a por 
tion of the encounter, and that when she looked 
there was but one man engaged with the guards 
men; a man whom she did not recognize as ever 
having seen." 

"Where is my erstwhile savior?" spoke 
another of the party, and I recognized the voice 
of the cousin of Than Kosis, whom I had rescued 
from the green warriors. "By the metal of my 
first ancestor," he went on, "but the description 
fits him to perfection, especially as to his fighting 
ability." 

"Where is this man?" cried Than Kosis. 
" Have him brought to me at once. What know 
you of him, cousin? It seemed strange to me now 
that I think upon it that there should have been 
such a fighting man in Zodanga, of whose name, 
even, we were ignorant before today. And his 
name too, John Carter, who ever heard of such 
a name upon Barsoom ! " 

Word was soon brought that I was nowhere 
to be found, either in the palace or at my former 
quarters in the barracks of the air-scout squadron. 
iKantos Kan, they had found and questioned, but 
he knew nothing of my whereabouts, and as to my 
past, he had told them he knew as little, since he 

[267] 



had but recently met me during our captivity among 
the Warhoons. 

" Keep your eyes on this other one," commanded 
Than Kosis. "He also is a stranger and likely 
as not they both hail from Helium, and where 
one is we shall sooner or later find the other. 
Quadruple the air patrol, and let every man who 
leaves the city by air or ground be subjected to 
the closest scrutiny." 

Another messenger now entered with word that 
I was still within the palace walls. 

" The likeness of every person who has entered 
or left the palace grounds today has been care 
fully examined," concluded the fellow, " and not 
one approaches the likeness of this new padwar 
of the guards, other than that which was recorded 
of him at the time he entered." 

"Then we will have him shortly," commented 
Than Kosis contentedly, "and in the meanwhile 
we will repair to the apartments of the Princess 
of Helium and question her in regard to the affair. 
She may know more than she cared to divulge 
to you, Notan. Come." 

They left the hall, and, as darkness had fallen 
without, I slipped lightly from my hiding place 
and hastened to the balcony. Few were in sight, 
[268] 



I FIND DEJAH 



and choosing a moment when none seemed near 
I sprang quickly to the top of the glass wall and 
from there to the avenue beyond the palace 
grounds. 



1 269 T 



CHAPTER XXIII 

LOST IN THE SKY 

WITHOUT effort at concealment I hastened 
to the vicinity of our quarters, where I 
felt sure I should find Kantos Kan. As I neared 
the building I became more careful, as I judged, 
and rightly, that the place would be guarded. Sev 
eral men in civilian metal loitered near the front 
entrance and in the rear were others. My only 
means of reaching, unseen, the upper story where 
our apartments were situated was through an 
adjoining building, and after considerable maneu 
vering I managed to attain the roof of a shop sev 
eral doors away. 

Leaping from roof to roof, I soon reached an 
open windpw in the building where I hoped to find 
the Heliumite, and in another moment I stood in 
the room before him. He was alone and showed 
no surprise at my coming, saying he had expected 
me much earlier, as my tour of duty must have 
ended some time since. 

I saw that he knew nothing of the events of 
[270] 



LOST IN THE SKY 



the day at the palace, and when I had enlightened 
him he was all excitement. The news that Dejah 
Thoris had promised her hand to Sab Than filled 
him with dismay. 

"It cannot be," he exclaimed. "It is impos 
sible I Why no man in all Helium but would pre 
fer death to the selling of our loved princess to 
the ruling house of Zodanga. She must have lost 
her mind to have assented to such an atrocious 
bargain. .You, who do not know how we of 
Helium love the members of our ruling house, 
cannot appreciate the horror with which I contem 
plate such an unholy alliance." 

"What can be done, John Carter?" he con 
tinued. "You are a resourceful man. Can you 
not think of some way to save Helium from this 
disgrace?" 

"If I can come within sword's reach of Sab 

[Than," I answered, " I can solve the difficulty in 

so far as Helium is concerned, but for personal 

reasons I would prefer that another struck the 

blow that frees Dejah Thoris." 

Kantos Kan eyed me narrowly before he spoke. 

" You love her ! " he said. " Does she know it ? " 

"She knows it, Kantos Kan, and repulses me 
only because she is promised to Sab Than." 
[271] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



The splendid fellow sprang to his feet, and 
grasping me by the shoulder raised his sword on 
high, exclaiming: 

"And had the choice been left to me I could 
not have chosen a more fitting mate for the first 
princess of Barsoom. Here is my hand upon 
your shoulder, John Carter, and my word that 
Sab Than shall go out at the point of my sword 
for the sake of my love for Helium, for Dejah 
Thoris, and for you. This very night I shall try 
to reach his quarters in the palace." 

"How?" I asked. "You are strongly guarded 
and a quadruple force patrols the sky." 

He bent his head in thought a moment, then 
raised it with an air of confidence. 

"I only need to pass these guards and I can 
do it," he said at last. " I know a secret entrance 
to the palace through the pinnacle of the highest 
tower. I fell upon it by chance one day as I wasi 
passing above the palace on patrol duty. In this 
,,vork it is required that we investigate any unusual 
occurrence we may witness, and a face peering 
from the pinnacle of the high tower of the palace 
was, to me, most unusual. I therefore drew near 
and discovered that the possessor of the peering 
face was none other than Sab Than. He was 
[272] 



LOST IN THE SKY 



slightly put out at being detected and commanded 
me to keep the matter to myself, explaining that 
the passage from the tower led directly to his 
apartments, and was known only to him. If I 
can reach the roof of the barracks and get my 
machine I can be in Sab Than's quarters in five 
minutes; but how am I to escape from this build 
ing, guarded as you say it is?" 

" How well are the machine sheds at the bar 
racks guarded?" I asked. 

"There is usually but one man on duty there at 
night upon the roof." 

" Go to the roof of this building, Kantos Kan, 
and wait me there." 

Without stopping to explain my plans I retraced 
my way to the street and hastened to the barracks. 
I did not dare to enter the building, filled as it 
was with members of the air-scout squadron, who, 
in common with all Zodanga, were on the lookout 
for me. 

The building was an enormous one, rearing its 
lofty head fully a thousand feet into the air. But 
few buildings in Zodanga were higher than these 
barracks, though several topped it by a few hun 
dred feet ; the docks of the great battleships of the 
line standing some fifteen hundred feet from the 

[273] 



ground, while the freight and passenger stations 
of the merchant squadrons rose nearly as high. 

It was a long climb up the face of the building, 
and one fraught with much danger, but there was 
no other way, and so I essayed the task. The 
fact that Barsoomian architecture is extremely 
ornate made the feat much simpler than I had 
anticipated, since I found ornamental ledges and 
projections which fairly formed a perfect ladder 
for me all the way to the eaves of the building. 
Here I met my first real obstacle. The eaves 
projected nearly twenty feet from the wall to which 
I clung, and though I encircled the great building 
I could find no opening through them. 

The top floor was alight, and filled with soldiers 
engaged in the pastimes of their kind; I could not, 
therefore, reach the roof through the building. 

There was one slight, desperate chance, and 
that I decided I must take it was for Dejah 
Thoris, and no man has lived who would not risk 
a thousand deaths for such as she. 

Clinging to the wall with my feet and one hand, 
I unloosened one of the long leather straps of my 
trappings at the end of which dangled a great 
hook by which air sailors are hung to the sides and 
bottoms of their craft for various purposes of 
[274] 



LOST IN THE SKY 



repair, and by means of which landing parties are 
lowered to the ground from the battleships. 

I swung this hook cautiously to the roof several 
times before it finally found lodgment; gently I 
pulled on it to strengthen its hold, but whether it 
would bear the weight of my body I did not know. 
it might be barely caught upon the very outer 
verge of the roof, so that as my body swung out 
at the end of the strap it would slip off and launch 
me to the pavement a thousand feet below. 

An instant I hesitated, and then, releasing my 
grasp upon the supporting ornament, I swung out 
into space at the end of the strap. Far below me 
lay the brilliantly lighted streets, the hard pave 
ments, and death. There was a little jerk at the 
top of the supporting eaves, and a nasty slipping, 
grating sound which turned me cold with appre 
hension; then the hook caught and I was safe. 

Clambering quickly aloft I grasped the edge of 
the eaves and drew myself to the surface .of the 
roof above. As I gained my feet I was confronted 
by the sentry on duty, into the muzzle of whose 
revolver I found myself looking. 

"Who are you and whence came you?" he 
cried. 

"I am an air scout, friend, and very near a 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



dead one, for just by the merest chance I escaped 
falling to the avenue below," I replied. 

"But how came you upon the roof, man? No 
one has landed or come up from the building for 
the past hour. Quick, explain yourself, or I call 
the guard." 

" Look you here, sentry, and you shall see how 
I came and how close a shave I had to not coming 
at all," I answered, turning toward the edge of 
the roof, where, twenty feet below, at the end of 
my strap, hung all my weapons. 

The fellow, acting on impulse of curiosity, 
stepped to my side and to his undoing, for as he 
leaned to peer over the eaves I grasped him by his 
throat and his pistol arm and threw him heavily 
to the roof. The weapon dropped from his grasp, 
and my fingers choked off his attempted cry for 
assistance. I gagged and bound him and then 
hung him over the edge of the roof as I myself 
had hung a few moments before. I knew it would 
be morning before he would be discovered, and I 
needed all the time that I could gain. 

Donning my trappings and weapons I hastened 
to the sheds, and soon had out both my machine 
and Kantos Kan's. Making his fast behind mine 
I started my engine, and skimming over the edge 

[276] 



LOST IN THE SKY 



of the roof I dove down into the streets of the 
city far below the plane usually occupied by the 
air patrol. In less than a minute I was settling 
safely upon the roof of our apartment beside the 
astonished Kantos Kan. 

I lost no time in explanations, but plunged imme 
diately into a discussion of our plans for the imme 
diate future. It was decided that I was to try to 
make Helium while Kantos Kan was to enter the 
palace and dispatch Sab Than. If successful he 
was then to follow me. He set my compass for 
me, a clever little device which will remain stead 
fastly fixed upon any given point on the surface 
of Barsoom, and bidding each other farewell we 
rose together and sped in the direction of the pal 
ace which lay in the route which I must take to 
reach Helium. 

As we neared the high tower a patrol shot down 
from above, throwing its piercing searchlight full 
upon my craft, and a voice roared out a command 
to halt, following with a shot as I paid no atten 
tion to his hail. Kantos Kan dropped quickly into 
the darkness, while I rose steadily and at terrific 
speed raced through the Martian sky followed 
by a dozen of the air-scout craft which had joined 
the pursuit, and later by a swift cruiser carrying a 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



hundred men and a battery of rapid-fire guns. By 
twisting and turning my little machine, now rising 
and now falling, I managed to elude their search 
lights most of the time, but I was also losing 
ground by these tactics, and so I decided to hazard 
everything on a straight-away course and leave the 
result to fate and the speed of my machine. 

Kantos Kan had shown me a trick of gearing, 
which is known only to the navy of Helium, that 
greatly increased the speed of our machines, so 
that I felt sure I could distance my pursuers if I 
could dodge their projectiles for a few moments. 

As I sped through the air the screeching of the 
bullets around me convinced me that only by a 
miracle could I escape, but the die was cast, and 
throwing on full speed I raced a straight course 
toward Helium. Gradually I left my pursuers 
further and further behind, and I was just con 
gratulating myself on my lucky escape, when a 
well-directed shot from the cruiser exploded at 
the prow of my little craft. The concussion nearly 
capsized her, and with a sickening plunge she 
hurtled downward through" the dark night. 

How far I fell before I regained control of 
the plane I do not know, but I must have been 
very close to the ground when I started to rise 
[278J 



LOST IN THE SKY 



again, as I plainly heard the squealing of animals 
below me. Rising again I scanned the heavens 
for my pursuers, and finally making out their 
lights far behind me, saw that they were land 
ing, evidently in search of me. 

Not until their lights were no longer discern 
ible did I venture to flach my little lamp upon my 
compass, and then I found to my consternation 
that a fragment of the projectile had utterly 
destroyed my only guide, as well as my speed 
ometer. It was true I could follow the stars in 
the general direction of Helium, but without know 
ing the exact location of the city or the speed at 
which I was traveling my chances for finding it 
were slim. 

Helium lies a thousand miles southwest of 
Zodanga, and with my compass intact I should 
have made the trip, barring accidents, in between 
four and five hours. As it turned out, however, 
morning found me speeding over a vast expanse 
of dead sea bottom after nearly six hours of con 
tinuous flight at high speed. Presently a great 
city showed below me, but it was not Helium, as 
that alone of all Barsoomian metropolises consists 
in two immense circular walled cities about seventyfive miles apart and would have been easily dis[279] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



tinguishable from the altitude at which I was flying. 
Believing that I had come too far to the north 
and west, I turned back in a southeasterly direc 
tion, passing during the forenoon several other 
large cities, but none resembling the description 
which Kantos Kan had given me of Helium. In 
addition to the twin-city formation of Helium, 
another distinguishing feature is the two immense 
towers, one of vivid scarlet rising nearly a mile 
into the air from the center of one of the cities, 
while the other, of bright yellow a-nd of the same 
height, marks her sister. 



t28oj 



CHAPTER XXIV 

TARS TARKAS FINDS A FRIEND 

ABOUT noon I passed low over a great dead 
city of ancient Mars, and as Iskimmed out 
across the plain beyond I came full upon several 
thousand green warriors engaged in a terrific bat 
tle. Scarcely had I seen them than a volley of 
shots was directed at me, and with the almost 
unfailing accuracy of their aim my little craft was 
instantly a ruined wreck, sinking erratically to the 
ground. 

I fell almost directly in the center of the fierce 
combat, among warriors who had not seen my 
approach so busily were they engaged in life and 
death struggles. The men were fighting on foot 
with long-swords, while an occasional shot from 
a sharpshooter on the outskirts of the conflict 
would bring down a warrior who might for an 
instant separate himself from the entangled mass. 

As my machine sank among them I realized 
that it was fight or die, with good chances of dying 
in any event, and so I struck the ground with drawn 
long-sword ready to defend myself as I could. 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



I fell beside a huge monster who was engaged 
with three antagonists, and as I glanced at his 
fierce face, filled with the light of battle, I rec 
ognized Tars Tarkas the Thark. He did not 
see me, as I was a trifle behind him, and just then 
the three warrriors opposing him, md whom I rec 
ognized as Warhoons, charged simultaneously. 
The mighty fellow made quick work of one of 
them, but in stepping back for another thrust he 
fell over a dead body behind him and was down 
and at the mercy of his foes in an instant. Quick 
as lightning they were upon him, and Tars Tarkas 
would have been gathered to his fathers in short 
order had I not sprung before his prostrate form 
and engaged his adversaries. I had accounted for 
one of them when the mighty Thark regained hU 
feet and quickly settled the other. 

He gave me one look, and a slight smile touched 
his grim lips as, touching my shoulder, he said, 

"I would scarcely recognize you, John Carter, 
but there is no other mortal upon Barsoom who 
would have done what you have for me. I think 
I have learned that there is such a thing as friend 
ship, my friend." 

He said no more, nor was there opportunity, 
for the Warhoons were closing in about us, and 
[282] 



TARS TARKAS FINDS A FRIEND 

together we fought, shoulder to shoulder, during 
all that long, hot afternoon, until the tide of bat 
tle turned and the remnant of the fierce Warhoon 
horde fell back upon their thoats, and fled into 
the gathering darkness. 

Ten thousand men had been engaged in that 
titanic struggle, and upon the field of battle lay 
three thousand dead. Neither side asked or gave 
quarter, nor did they attempt to take prisoners. 

On our return to the city after the battle we 
had gone directly to Tars Tarkas' quarters, where 
I was left alone while the chieftain attended the 
customary council which immediately follows an 
engagement. 

As I sat awaiting the return of the green war 
rior I heard something move in an adjoining apart 
ment, and as I glanced up there rushed suddenly 
upon me a huge and hideous creature which bore 
me backward upon the pile of silks and furs upon 
which I had been reclining. It was Woola 
faithful, loving Woola. He had found his way 
back to Thark and, as Tars Tarkas later told me, 
had gone immediately to my former quarters 
where he had taken up his pathetic and seemingly 
hopeless watch for my return. 

"Tal Hajus knows that you are here, John 
[283] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



Carter," said Tars Tarkas, on his return from the 
jeddak's quarters; "Sarkoja saw and recognized 
you as we were returning. Tal Hajus has ordered 
me to bring you before him tonight. I have ten 
thoats, John Carter; you may take your choice 
from among them, and I will accompany you to 
ithe nearest waterway that leads to Helium. Tars 
fTarkas may be a cruel green warrior, but he can 
, be a friend as well. Come, we must start." 

" And when you return, Tars Tarkas ? " I asked. 

"The wild calots, possibly, or worse," he 
replied. "Unless I should chance to have the 
opportunity I have so long waited of battling with 
[Tal Hajus." 

"We will stay, Tars Tarkas, and see Tal Hajus 
(tonight. You shall not sacrifice yourself, and it 
may be that tonight you can have the chance you 



wait." 



He objected strenuously, saying that Tal Hajus 
often flew into wild fits of passion at the mere 
thought of the blow I had dealt him, and that if 
ever he laid his hands upon me I would be sub 
jected to the most horrible tortures. 

While we were eating I repeated to Tars Tarkas 
the story which Sola had told me that night upon 
the sea bottom during the march to Thark. 
[284] 



TARS TARKAS FINDS A FRIEND 

He said but little, but the great muscles of his 
face worked in passion and in agony at recollec 
tion of the horrors which had been heaped upon 
the only thing he had ever loved in all his cold, 
cruel, terrible existence. 

He no longer demurred when I suggested that 
we go before Tal Hajus, only saying that he would 
like to speak to Sarkoja first. At his request I 
accompanied him to her quarters, and the look of 
venomous hatred she cast upon me was almost 
adequate recompense for any future misfortunes 
this accidental return to Thark might bring me. 

" Sarkoja," said Tars Tarkas, " forty years ago 
you were instrumental in bringing about the tor 
ture and death of a woman named Gozava. I 
have just discovered that the warrior who loved 
that woman has learned of your part in the trans 
action. He may not kill you, Sarkoja, it is not 
>ur custom, but there is nothing to prevent him 
tying one end of a strap about your neck and the 
other end to a wild thoat, merely to test your 
fitness to survive and help perpetuate our race. 
Having heard that he would do this on the mor 
row, I thought it only right to warn you, for I 
am a just man. The river Iss is but a short pil 
grimage, Sarkoja. Come, John Carter. 

[285] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



The next morning Sarkoja was gone, nor was 
she ever seen after. 

In silence we hastened to the jeddak's palace, 
where we were immediately admitted to his pres 
ence; in fact, he could scarcely wait to see me and 
was standing erect upon his platform glowering 
at the entrance as I came in. 

"Strap him to that pillar," he shrieked. "We 
shall see who it is dares strike the mighty Tal 
Hajus. Heat the irons ; with my own hands I shall 
burn the eyes from his head that he may not 
pollute my person with his vile gaze." 

" Chieftains of Thark," I cried, turning to the 
assembled council and ignoring Tal Hajus, "I 
have been a chief among you, and today I have 
fought for Thark shouMer to shoulder with her 
greatest warrior. You owe me, at least, a hear 
ing. I have won that much today. You claim 
to be just people " 

" Silence," roared Tal Hajus. " Gag the crea 
ture and bind him as I command." 

"Justice, Tal Hajus," exclaimed Lorquas 
Ptomel. " Who are you to set aside the customs 
of ages among the Tharks." 

"Yes, justice! " echoed a dozen voices, and so, 
while Tal Hajus fumed and frothed, I continued. 
[286] 



TARS TARKAS FINDS A FRIEND 

" You are a brave people and you love bravery, 
but where was your mighty jeddak during the fight 
ing today ? I did not see him in the thick of bat 
tle ; he was not there. He rends defenseless women 
and little children in his lair, but how recently has 
one of you seen him fight with men? Why, even 
I, a midget beside him, felled him with a single 
blow of my fist. Is it of such that the Tharks 
fashion their jeddaks? There stands beside me 
now a great Thark, a mighty warrior and a noble 
man. Chieftains, how sounds, Tars Tarkas, Jeddak of Thark?" 

A roar of deep-toned applause greeted this sug 
gestion. 

" It but remains for this council to command, 
and Tal Hajus must prove his fitness to rule. Were 
he a brave man he would invite Tars Tarkas to 
combat, for he does not love him, but Tal Hajus 
is afraid; Tal Hajus, your jeddak, is a coward. 
With my bare hands I could kill him, and he 
knows it." 

After I ceased there was tense silence, as all 
eyes were riveted upon Tal Hajus. He did not 
speak or move, but the blotchy green of his coun 
tenance turned livid, and the froth froze upon his 
lips. 

[287] 



'A PRINCESS OF MARS 



"Tal Hajus," said Lorquas Ptomel in a cold, 
hard voice, "nev in my long life have I seen a 
jeddak of the Tharks so humiliated. There could 
be but one answer to this arraignment. We wait 
it." And still Tal Hajus stood as though pet 
rified. 

" Chieftains," continued Lorquas Ptomel, " shall 
the jeddak, Tal Hajus, prove his fitness to rule 
over Tars Tarkas ? " 

There were twenty chieftains about the rostrum, 
and twenty swords flashed high in assent. 

There was no alternative. That decree was 
final, and so Tal Hajus drew his long-sword and 
advanced to meet Tars Tarkas. 

The combat was soon over, and, with his foot 
upon the neck of the dead monster, Tars Tarkas 
became jeddak among the Tharks. 

His first act was to make me a full-fledged chief 
tain with the rank I had won by my combats the 
first few weeks of my captivity among them. 

Seeing the favorable disposition of the warriors 
toward Tars Tarkas, as well as toward me, I 
grasped the opportunity to enlist them in my cause 
against Zodanga. I told Tars Tarkas the story of 
my adventures, and in a few words had explained 
to him the thought I had in mind. 
[288] 



TARS TARKAS FINDS A FRIEND 

"John Carter has made a proposal," he said, 
addressing the council, "which meets with my 
sanction. I shall put it to you briefly. Dejah 
Thoris, the Princess of Helium, who was our 
prisoner, is now held by the jeddak of Zodanga, 
whose son she must wed to save her country from 
devastation at the hands of the Zodangan forces. 

"John Carter suggests that we rescue her and 
return her to Helium. The loot of Zodanga would 
be magnificent, and I have often thought that had 
we an alliance with the people of Helium we could 
obtain sufficient assurance of sustenance to permit 
us to increase the size and frequency of our hatch 
ings, and thus become unquestionably supreme 
among the green men of all Barsoom. What 
say you?" 

It was a chance to fight, an opportunity to loot, 
and they rose to the bait as a speckled trout to a 
fly. 

For Tharks they were wildly enthusiastic, and 
before another half hour had passed twenty 
mounted messengers were speeding across dead 
sea bottoms to call the hordes together for the 
expedition. 

In three days we were on the march toward 
Zodanga, one hundred thousand strong, as Tars 
[289] 



 PRINCESS OF MARS 



to climb upon the shoulders of the upper two. The 
head of the topmost warrior towered over forty 
feet from the ground. 

In this way, with ten warriors, I built a series 
of three steps from the ground to the shoulders of 
the topmost man. Then starting from a short dis 
tance behind them I ran swiftly up from one tier 
to the next, and with a final bound from the broad 
shoulders of the highest I clutched the top of the 
great wall and quietly drew myself to its broad 
expanse. After me I dragged six lengths of leather 
from an equal number of my warriors. These 
lengths we had previously fastened together, and 
passing one end to the topmost warrior I lowered 
the other end cautiously over the opposite side of 
the wall toward the avenue below. No one was 
in sight, so, lowering myself to the end of my 
leather strap, I dropped the remaining thirty feet 
to the pavement below. 

I had learned from Kantos Kan the secret of 
opening these gates, and in another moment my 
twenty great fighting men stood within the doomed 
city of Zodanga. 

I found to my delight that I had entered at the 
lower boundary of the enormous palace grounds. 
The building itself showed in the distance a blaze 
[292] 



TARS TARKAS FINDS A FRIEND 

of glorious light, and on the instant I determined 
to lead a detachment of warriors directly within 
the palace itself, while the balance of the great 
horde was attacking the barracks of the soldiery. 
Dispatching one of my men to Tars Tarkas for 
a detail of fifty Tharks, with word of my inten 
tions, I ordered ten warriors to capture and open 
one of the great gates while with the nine remain 
ing I took the other. We were to do our work 
quietly, no shots were to be fired and no general ad 
vance made until I had reached the palace with my 
fifty Tharks. Our plans worked to perfection. The 
two sentries we met were dispatched to their 
fathers upon the banks of the lost sea of Korus, 
and the guards at both gates followed them in 
silence. 



CHAPTER XXV 

THE LOOTING OF ZODANGA 

AS the great gate where I stood swung open 
my fifty Tharks, headed by Tars Tarkas 
himself, rode in upon their mighty thoats. I led 
them to the palace walls, which I negotiated easily 
without assistance. Once inside, however, the 
gate gave me considerable trouble, but I finally 
was rewarded by seeing it swing upon its huge 
hinges, and soon my fierce escort was riding across 
the gardens of the jeddak of Zodanga. 

As we approached the palace I could see through 
the great windows of the first floor into the bril 
liantly illuminated audience chamber of Than 
Kosis. The immense hall was crowded with nobles 
and their women, as though some important func 
tion was in progress. There was not a guard in 
sight without the palace, due, I presume, to the 
fact that the city and palace walls were considered 
impregnable, and so I came close and peered 
within. 

At one end of the chamber, upon massive golden 
[294J 



VHE LOOTING OF ZODANGA 

thrones encrusted with diamonds, sat Than Kosis 
and his consort, surrounded by officers and dig 
nitaries of state. Before them stretched a broad 
aisle lined on either side with soldiery, and as I 
looked there entered this aisle at the far end of 
the hall, the head of a procession which advanced 
to the foot of the throne. 

First there marched four officers of the jeddak's Guard bearing a huge salver on which 
reposed, upon a cushion of scarlet silk, a great 
golden chain with a collar and padlock at each 
end. Directly behind these officers came four 
others carrying a similar salver which supported 
the magnificent ornaments of a prince and prin 
cess of the reigning house of Zodanga. 

At the foot of the throne these two parties sep 
arated and halted, facing each other at opposite 
sides of the aisle. Then came more dignitaries, 
and the officers of the palace and of the army, 
and finally two figures entirely muffled in scarlet 
silk, so that not a feature of either was discern 
ible. These two stopped at the foot of the throne, 
facing Than Kosis. When the balance of the pro 
cession had entered and assumed their stations 
Than Kosis addressed the couple standing before 
him. I could not hear his words, but presently 
[295] 



CHAPTER XXV 

THE LOOTING OF ZODANGA 

AS the great gate where I stood swung open 
my fifty Tharks, headed by Tars Tarkas 
himself, rode in upon their mighty thoats. I led 
them to the palace walls, which I negotiated easily 
without assistance. Once inside, however, the 
gate gave me considerable trouble, but I finally 
was rewarded by seeing it swing upon its huge 
hinges, and soon my fierce escort was riding across 
the gardens of the jeddak of Zodanga. 

As we approached the palace I could see through 
the great windows of the first floor into the bril 
liantly illuminated audience chamber of Than 
Kosis. The immense hall was crowded with nobles 
and their women, as though some important func 
tion was in progress. There was not a guard in 
sight without the palace, due, I presume, to the 
fact that the city and palace walls were considered 
impregnable, and so I came close and peered 
within. 

At one end of the chamber, upon massive golden 
[294J 



VHE LOOTING OF ZODANGA 

thrones encrusted with diamonds, sat Than Kosis 
and his consort, surrounded by officers and dig 
nitaries of state. Before them stretched a broad 
aisle lined on either side with soldiery, and as I 
looked there entered this aisle at the far end of 
the hall, the head of a procession which advanced 
to the foot of the throne. 

First there marched four officers of the jeddak's Guard bearing a huge salver on which 
reposed, upon a cushion of scarlet silk, a great 
golden chain with a collar and padlock at each 
end. Directly behind these officers came four 
others carrying a similar salver which supported 
the magnificent ornaments of a prince and prin 
cess of the reigning house of Zodanga. 

At the foot of the throne these two parties sep 
arated and halted, facing each other at opposite 
sides of the aisle. Then came more dignitaries, 
and the officers of the palace and of the army, 
and finally two figures entirely muffled in scarlet 
silk, so that not a feature of either was discern 
ible. These two stopped at the foot of the throne, 
facing Than Kosis. When the balance of the pro 
cession had entered and assumed their stations 
Than Kosis addressed the couple standing before 
him. I could not hear his words, but presently 
[295] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



two officers advanced and removed the scarlet 
robe from one of the figures, and I saw that Kantos 
Kan had failed in his mission, for it was Sab Than, 
Prince of Zodanga, who stood revealed before me. 

Than Kosis now took a set of the ornaments 
from one of the salvers and placed one of the col 
lars of gold about his son's neck, springing the 
padlock fast. After a few more words addressed 
to Sab Than he turned to the other figure, from 
which the officers now removed the enshrouding 
silks, disclosing to my now comprehending view 
Dejah Thoris, Princess of Helium. 

The object of the ceremony was clear to me; 
in another moment Dejah Thoris would be joined 
forever to the Prince of Zodanga. It was an 
impressive and beautiful ceremony, I presume, but 
to me it seemed the most fiendish sight I had ever 
witnessed, and as the ornaments were adjusted 
upon her beautiful figure and her collar of gold 
swung open in the hands of Than Kosis I raised 
my long-sword above my head, and, with the heavy 
hilt, I shattered the glass of the great window 
and sprang into the midst of the astonished assem 
blage. With a bound I was on the steps of the 
platform beside Than Kosis, and as he stood 
riveted with surprise I brought my long-sword 

[296] 



THE LOOTING OF ZODANGA 

down upon the golden chain that would have bound 
Dejah Thoris to another. 

In an instant all was confusion; a thousana 
drawn swords menaced me from every quarter, 
and Sab Than sprang upon me with a jeweled 
dagger he had drawn from his nuptial ornaments. 
I could have killed him as easily as I might a fly, 
but the age-old custom of Barsoom stayed my hand, 
and grasping his wrist as the dagger flew toward 
my heart I held him as though in a vise and with 
my long-sword pointed to the far end of the hall. 

"Zodanga has fallen," I cried. "Look!" 

All eyes turned in the direction I had indicated, 
and there, forging through the portals of the 
entrance-way rode Tars Tarkas and his fifty war 
riors on their great thoats. 

A cry of alarm and amazement broke from 
the assemblage, but no word of fear, and in a 
moment the soldiers and nobles of Zodanga were 
hurling themselves upon the advancing Tharks. 

Thrusting Sab Than headlong from the plat 
form, I drew Dejah Thoris to my side. Behind 
the throne was a narrow doorway and in this 
Than Kosis now stood facing me, with drawn 
long-sword. In an instant we were engaged,, and 
I found no mean antagonist. 

[297] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



As we circled upon the broad platform I saw 
Sab Than rushing up the steps to aid his father, 
but, as he raised his hand to strike, Dejah Thoris 
sprang before him and then my sword found the 
spot that made Sab Than jeddak of Zodanga. As 
his father rolled dead upon the floor the new jed 
dak tore himself free from Dejah Thoris' grasp, 
and again we faced each other. He was soon 
joined by a quartet of officers, and, with my back 
against a golden throne, I fought once again for 
Dejah Thoris. I was hard pressed to defend 
myself and yet not strike down Sab Than and, 
with him, my last chance to win the woman I 
loved. My blade was swinging with the rapidity 
of lightning as I sought to parry the thrusts and 
cuts of my opponents. Two I had disarmed, and 
one was down, when several more rushed to the 
aid of their new ruler, and to avenge the death of 
the old. 

As they advanced there were cries of "The 
woman! The woman! Strike her down; it is her 
plot. Kill her I Kill her I" 

Calling to Dejah Thoris to get behind me I 

worked my way toward the little doorway back of 

the throne, but the officers realized my intentions, 

and three of them sprang in behind me and blocked 

[298] 



THE LOOTING OF ZODANGA 



my chances for gaming a position where I could 
have defended Dejah Thoris against an army of 
swordsmen. 

The Tharks were having their hands full in the 
center of the room, and I began to realize that 
nothing short of a miracle could save Dejah Thoris 
and myself, when I saw Tars Tarkas surging 
through the crowd of pigmies that swarmed about 
him. With one swing of his mighty long-sword he 
laid a dozen corpses at his feet, and so he hewed a 
pathway before him until in another moment he 
stood upon the platform beside me, dealing death 
and destruction right and left. 

The bravery of the Zodangans was awe-inspir 
ing, not one attempted to escape, and when the 
fighting ceased it was because only Tharks 
remained alive in the great hall, other than Dejah 
Thoris and myself. 

Sab Than lay dead beside his father, and the 
corpses of the flower of Zodangan nobility and 
chivalry covered the floor of the bloody shambles. 

My first thought when the battle was over was 
for Kantos Kan, and leaving Dejah Thoris in 
charge of Tars Tarkas I took a dozen warriors 
and hastened to the dungeons beneath the palce. 
The jailers had all left to join the fighters in tfcrt 

[299] 



throne room, so we searched the labyrinthine 
prison without opposition. 

I called Kantos Kan's name aloud in each new 
corridor and compartment, and finally I was 
rewarded by hearing a faint response. Guided 
by the sound, we soon found him helpless in a 
daYk recess. 

He was overjoyed at seeing me, and to know 
the meaning of the fight, faint echoes of which 
had reached his prison cell. He told me that the 
air patrol had captured him before he reached 
the high tower of the palace, so that he had not 
even seen Sab Than. 

We discovered that it would be futile to attempt 
to cut away the bars and chains which held him 
prisoner, so, at his suggestion I returned to search 
the bodies on the floor above for keys to open the 
padlocks of his cell and of his chains. 

Fortunately among the first I examined I found 
his jailer, and soon we had Kantos Kan with u 
in the throne room. 

The sounds of heavy firing, mingled with shouts 
and cries, came to us from the city's streets, and 
Tars Tarkas hastened away to direct the fighting 
without. Kantos Kan accompanied him to act as 
guide, the green warriors commencing a thorough 
[300] 



THE LOOTING OF ZODANGA 

search of the palace for other Zodangans and for 
loot, and Dejah Thoris and I were left alone. 

She had sunk into one of the golden thrones, 
and as I turned to her she greeted me with a wan 
smile. 

" Was there ever such a man I " she exclaimed. 
" I know that Barsoom has never before seen yeur 
like. Ca-n it be that all Earth men are as you? 
Alone, a stranger, hunted, threatened, persecuted, 
you have done in a few short months what in all 
the past ages of Barsoom no man has ever done : 
joined together the wild hordes of the sea bottoms 
and brought them to fight as allies of a red Mar 
tian people." 

"The answer is easy, Dejah Thoris," I replied 
smiling. "It was not I who did it, it was love, 
love for Dejah Thoris, a power that would work 
greater miracles than this you have seen." 

A pretty flush overspread her face and she 
answered, 

"You may say that now, John Carter, and I 
may listen, for I am free." 

"And more still I have to say, ere it is again 
too late," I returned. " I have done many strange 
things in my life, many things that wiser men 
would not have dared, but never in my wildest 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



fancies have I dreamed of winning a Dejah Thoris 
for myself for never had I dreamed that in all 
the universe dwelt such a woman as the Princess 
of Helium. That you are a princess does not 
abash me, but that you are you is enough to make 
me doubt my sanity as I ask you, my princess, to 
be mine." 

" He does not need to be abashed who so well 
knew the answer to his plea before the plea were 
irade," she replied, rising and placing her dear 
hands upon my shoulders, and so I took her in my 
arms and kissed her. 

And thus in the midst of a city of wild conflict, 
filled with the alarms of war; with death and 
destruction reaping their terrible harvest around 
her, did Dejah Thoris, Princess of Helium, true 
daughter of Mars, the God of War, promise her 
self in marriage to John Carter, Gentleman of 
.Virginia. 



[302] 



CHAPTER XXVI 

! THROUGH CARNAGE TO JOY 

SOMETIME later Tars Tarkas and Kantos 
Kan returned to report that Zodanga had 
been completely reduced. Her forces were entirely 
destroyed or captured, and no further resistance 
was to be expected from within. Several battle 
ships had escaped, but there were thousands of 
war and merchant vessels under guard of Thark 
warriors. 

The lesser hordes had commenced looting and 
quarreling among themselves, so it was decided 
that we collect what warriors we could, man as 
many vessels as possible with Zodangan prisoners 
and make for Helium without further loss of time. 

Five hours later we sailed from the roofs of 
the dock buildings with a fleet of two hundred and 
fifty battleships, carrying nearly one hundred 
thousand green warrjors, followed by a fleet of 
transports with our thoats. 

Behind us we left the stricken city in the fierce 
and brutal clutches of some forty thousand gretf x 
[303] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



warriors of the lesser hordes. They were looting, 
murdering, and fighting amongst themselves. In 
a hundred places they had applied the torch, and 
columns of dense smoke were rising above the 
city as though to blot out from the eye of heaven 
the horrid sights beneath. 

In the middle of the afternoon we sighted the 
scarlet and yellow towers of Helium, and a short 
time later a great fleet of Zodangan battleships 
rose from the camps of the besiegers without the 
city, and advanced to meet us. 

The banners of Helium had been strung from 
stem to stern of each of our mighty craft, but the 
Zodangans did not need this sign to realize that 
we were enemies, for our green Martian warriors 
had opened fire upon them almost as they left the 
ground. With their uncanny marksmanship they 
raked the on-coming fleet with volley after volley. 

The twin cities of Helium, perceiving that we 
were friends, sent out hundreds of vessels to aid 
us, and then began the first real air battle I had 
ever witnessed. 

The vessels carrying our green warriors were 

kept circling above the contending fleets of Helium 

and Zodanga, since their batteries were useless in 

the hands of the Tharks who, having no navy, 

[304] 



THROUGH CARNAGE TO JOY 
 i 

have no skill in naval gunnery. Their smallarm 
fire, however, was most effective, and the final 
outcome of the engagement was strongly influ 
enced, if not wholly determined, by their presence. 

At first the two forces circled at the same alti 
tude, pouring broadside after broadside into each 
other. Presently a great hole was torn in the hull 
of one of the immense battle craft from the Zodangan camp ; with a lurch she turned completely over, 
the little figures of her crew plunging, turning and 
twisting toward the ground a thousand feet below; 
then with sickening velocity she tore after them, 
almost completely burying herself in the soft loam 
of the ancient sea bottom. 

A wild cry of exultation arose from the Heliumite squadron, and with redoubled ferocity they 
fell upon the Zodangan fleet. By a pretty maneu 
ver two of the vessels of Helium gained a posi 
tion above their adversaries, from which they 
poured upon them from their keel bomb batteries 
a perfect torrent of exploding bombs. 

Then, one by one, the battleships of Helium 
succeeded in rising above the Zodangans, and in a 
short time a number of the beleaguering battleships 
were drifting hopeless wrecks toward the high 
scarlet tower of greater Helium. Several others 
[405] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



attempted to escape, but they were soon surrounded 
by thousands of tiny individual fliers, and above 
each hung a monster battleship of Helium ready 
to drop boarding parties upon their decks. 

Within but little more than an hour from the 
moment the victorious Zodangan squadron had 
risen to meet us from the camp of the besiegers 
the battle was over, and the remaining vessels of 
the conquered Zodangans were headed toward the 
cities of Helium under prize crews. 

There was an extremely pathetic side to the sur 
render of these mighty fliers, the result of an ageold custom which demanded that surrender should 
be signalized by the voluntary plunging to earth 
of the commander of the vanquished vessel. One 
after another the brave fellows, holding their 
colors high above their heads, leaped from the 
towering bows of their mighty craft to an awful 
death. 

Not until the commander of the entire fleet 
took the fearful plunge, thus indicating the sur 
render of the remaining vessels, did the fighting 
cease, and the useless sacrifice of brave men come 
to an end. 

We now signaled the flagship of Helium's navy 
to approach, and when she was within hailing di 
[306] 



THROUGH CARNAGE TO JOY 

tance I called out that we had the Princess Dejah 
Thoris on board, and that we wished to transfer 
her to the flagship that she might be taken imme 
diately to the city. 

As the full import of my announcement bore 
in upon them a great cry arose from the decks of 
the flagship, and a moment later the colors of the 
Princess of Helium broke from a hundred points 
upon her upper works. When the other vessels 
of the squadron caught the meaning of the signals 
flashed them they took up the wild acclaim and 
unfurled her colors in the gleaming sunlight. 

The flagship bore down upon us, and as she 
swung gracefully to and touched our side a dozen 
officers sprang upon our decks. As their aston 
ished gaze fell upon the hundreds of green 
warriors, who now came forth from the fighting 
shelters, they stopped aghast, but at sight of Kantos Kan, who advanced to meet them, they came 
forward, crowding about him. 

Dejah Thoris and I then advanced, and they 
had no eyes for other than her. She received them 
gracefully, calling each by name, for they were 
men high in the esteem and service of her grand 
father, and she knew them well. 

"Lay your hands upon the shoulder of John 

[307] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



Carter," she said to them, turning toward me, 
"the man to whom Helium owes her princess as 
well as her victory today." 

They were very courteous to me and said many 
kind and complimentary things, but what seemed 
to impress them most was that I had won the aid 
of the fierce Tharks in my campaign for the liber 
ation of Dejah Thoris, and the relief of Helium. 

"You owe your thanks more to another man 
than to me," I said, "and here he is; meet one of 
Barsoom's greatest soldiers and statesmen, Tars 
Tsrkas, Jeddak of Thark." 

With the same polished courtesy that had 
marked their manner toward me they extended 
their greetings to the great Thark, nor, to my sur 
prise, was he much behind them in ease of bearing 
or in courtly speech. Though not a garrulous race, 
the Tharks are extremely formal, and their ways 
lend themselves amazingly to dignified and courtly 
manners. 

Dejah Thoris went aboard the flagship, and 
was much put out that I would not follow, but, as 
I explained to her, the battle was but partly won ; 
we still had the land forces of the besieging Zodangans to account for, and I would not leave Tars 
Tarkas until that had been accomplished. 
[308] 



THROUGH CARNAGE TO JOY 

The commander of the naval forces of Helium 
promised to arrange to have the armies of Helium 
attack from the city in conjunction with our land 
attack, and so the vessels separated and Dejah 
Thoris was borne in triumph back to the court of 
her grandfather, Tardos Mors, Jeddak of Helium. 

In the distance lay our fleet of transports, with 
the thoats of the green warriors, where they had 
remained during the battle. Without landing 
stages it was to be a difficult matter to unload these 
beasts upon the open plain, but there was noth 
ing else for it, and so we put out for a point about 
ten miles from the city and began the task. 

It was necessary to lower the animals to the 
ground in slings and this work occupied the re 
mainder of the day and half the night. Twice 
we were attacked by parties of Zodangan cavalry J 
but with little loss, however, and after darkness 
shut down they withdrew. 

As soon as the last thoat was unloaded Tars 
Tarkas gave the command to advance, and in 
three parties we crept upon the Zodangan camp 
from the north, the south and the east. 

About a mile from the main camp we encoun 
tered their outposts and, as had been prearranged, 
accepted this as the signal to charge. With wild, 

[309] 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



ferocious cries and amidst the nasty squealing of 
battle-enraged thoats we bore down upon the 
Zodangans. 

We did not catch them napping, but found a 
well-entrenched battle line confronting us. Time 
after time we were repulsed until, toward noon, I 
began to fear for the result of the battle. 

The Zodangans numbered nearly a million 
fighting men, gathered from pole to pole, whereever stretched their ribbon-like waterways, while 
pitted against them were less than a hundred thou 
sand green warriors. The forces from Helium 
had not arrived, nor could we receive any word 
from them. 

Just at noon we heard heavy firing all along the 
line between the Zodangans and the cities, and we 
knew then that our much-needed reinforcements 
had come. 

Again Tars Tarkas ordered the charge, and 
once more the mighty thoats bore their terrible 
riders against the ramparts of the enemy. At the 
same moment the battle line of Helium surged 
over the opposite breastworks of the Zodangans 
and in another moment they were being crushed 
as between two millstones. Nobly they fought, 
but in vain. 



THROUGH CARNAGE TO JOY 

The plain before the city became a veritable 
shambles ere the last Zodangan surrendered, but 
finally the carnage ceased, the prisoners were 
marched back to Helium, and we entered the 
greater city's gates, a huge triumphal procession 
of conquering heroes. 

The broad avenues were lined with women and 
children, among which were the few men whose 
duties necessitated that they remain within the city 
during the battle. We were greeted with an end 
less round of applause and showered with orna 
ments of gold, platinum, silver, and precious 
jewels. The city had gone mad with joy. 

My fierce Tharks caused the wildest excitement 
and enthusiasm. Never before had an armed body 
of green warriors entered the gates of Helium, 
and that they came now as friends and allies filled 
the red men with rejoicing. 

That my poor services to Dejah Thoris had 
become known to the Heliumites was evidenced 
by the loud crying of my name, and by the loads 
of ornaments that were fastened upon me and my 
huge thoat as we passed up the avenues to the 
palace, for even in the face of the ferocious ap 
pearance of Woola the populace pressed close 
about me. 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 

As we approached this magnificent pile we were 
met by a party of officers who greeted us warmly 
and requested that Tars Tarkas and his jeds with 
the jeddaks and jeds of his wild allies, together 
with myself, dismount and accompany them to 
receive from Tardos Mors an expression of his 
gratitude for our services. 

At the top of the great steps leading up to the 
main portals of the palace stood the royal party, 
and as we reached the lower steps one of their 
number descended to meet us. He was an almost 
perfect specimen of manhood; tall, straight as an 
arrow, superbly muscled and with the carriage and 
bearing of a ruler of men. I did not need to be 
told that he was Tardos Mors, Jeddak of Helium. 

The first member of our party he met was Tars 
Tarkas and his first words sealed forever the new 
friendship between the races. 

"That Tardos Mors," he said, earnestly, "may 
meet the greatest living warrior of Barsoom is a 
priceless honor, but that he may lay his hand on 
the shoulder of a friend and ally is a far greater 
boon." 

"Jeddak of Helium," returned Tars Tarkas, 
" it has remained for a man of another world to 
teach the green warriors of Barsoom the meaning 
F3I2] 



THROUGH CARNAGE TO JOY 

of friendship; to him we owe the fact that the 
hordes of Thark can understand you; that they 
can appreciate and reciprocate the sentiments so 
graciously expressed." 

Tardos Mors then greeted eaich of the green 
yeddaks and jeds, and to each spoke words of' 
friendship and appreciation. 

As he approached me he laid both hands upon 
my shoulders. 

"Welcome, my son," he said; "that you are 
granted, gladly, and without one word of opposition, the most precious jewel in all Helium, yes, 
on all Barsoom, is sufficient earnest of my esteem." 

We were then presented to Mors Kajak, Jed of 
lesser Helium, and father of Dejah Thoris. He 
had followed close behind Tardos Mors and 
seemed even more affected by the meeting than had 
his father. 

He tried a dozen times to express his gratitude 
to me, but his voice choked with emotion and he 
could not speak, and yet he had, as I was to later 
learn, a reputation for ferocity and fearlessness 
as a fighter that was remarkable even upon war 
like Barsoom. In common with all Helium he 
worshiped his daughter, nor could he think of 
what she had escaped without deep emotion. 



F 



CHAPTER XXVII 

FROM JOY TO DEATH 

OR ten days the hordes of Thark and their 
wild allies were feasted and entertained, and, 
then, loaded with costly presents and escorted by 
ten thousand soldiers of Helium commanded by 
Mors Kajak, they started on the return journey to 
their own lands. The jed of lesser Helium with 
a small party of nobles accompanied them all the 
way to Thark to cement more closely the new 
bonds of peace and friendship. 

Sola also accompanied Tars Tarkas, her father, 
who before all his chieftains had acknowledged 
her as his daughter. 

Three weeks later, Mors Kajak and his officers, 
accompanied by Tars Tarkas and Sola, returned 
upon a battleship that had been dispatched to 
Thark to fetch them in time for the ceremony 
which made Dejah Thoris and John Carter one. 

For nine years I served in the councils and 
fought in the armies of Helium as a prince of the 
house of Tardos Mors. The people seemed never 

[314] 



FROM JOY TO DEATH 



to tire of heaping honors upon me, and no day 
passed that did not bring some new proof of their 
love for my princess, the incomparable Dejah 
Thoris. 

In a golden incubator upon the roof of our 
palace lay a snow-white egg. For nearly five 
years ten soldiers of the jeddak's Guard had con 
stantly stood over it, and not a day passed when 
I was in the city that Dejah Thoris and I did not 
5tand hand in hand before our little shrine plan 
ning for the future, when the delicate shell should 
break. 

Vivid in my memory is the picture of the last 
night as we sat there talking in low tones of the 
strange romance which had woven our lives 
together and of this wonder which was coming to 
augment our happiness and fulfill our hopes. 

In the distance we saw the bright-white light of 
an approaching airship, but we attached no special 
significance to so common a sight. Like a bolt of 
iightning it raced toward Helium until its very 
speed bespoke the unusual. 

Flashing the signals which proclaimed it a dis 
patch bearer for the jeddak, it circled impatiently 
awaiting the tardy patrol boat which must convoy 
it to the palace docks. 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



Ten minutes after it touched at the palace a 
message called me to the council chamber, which 
I found filling with the members of that body. 

On the raised platform of the throne was Tardos Mors, pacing back and forth with tense-drawn 
face. When all were in their seats he turned 
toward us. 

"This morning," he said, "word reached the 
several governments of Barsoom that the keeper 
of the atmosphere plant had made no wireless 
report for two days, nor had almost ceaseless calls 
upon him from a score of capitals elicited a sign 
of response. 

"The ambassadors of the other nations asked 
us to take the matter in hand and hasten the assist 
ant keeper to the plant. All day a thousand cruis 
ers have been searching for him until, just now 
one of them returns bearing his dead body, which 
was found in the pits beneath his house horribly 
mutilated by some assassin. 

" I do not need to tell you what this means to 
Barsoom. It would take months to- penetrate 
those mighty walls, in fact the work has already 
commenced, and there would be little to fear were 
the engine of the pumping plant to run as it should 
and as they all have for hundreds of years; but 



FROM JOY TO DEATH 



the worst, we fear, has happened. The instru 
ments show a rapidly decreasing air pressure on 
all parts of Barsoom the engine has stopped." 

"My gentlemen," he concluded, "we have at 
best three days to live." 

There was absolute silence for several minutes, 
and then a young noble arose, and with his drawn 
sword held high above his head addressed Tardos 
Mors. 

"The men of Helium have prided themselves 
that they have ever shown Barsoom how a nation 
of red men should live, now is our opportunity to 
show them how they should die. Let us go about 
our duties as though a thousand useful years still 
lay before us." 

The chamber rang with applause and as there 
was nothing better to do than to allay the fears 
of the people by our example we went our ways 
with smiles upon our faces and sorrow gnawing at 
our hearts. 

When I returned to my palace I found that the 
rumor already had reached Dejah Thoris, so I 
told her all that I had heard. 

"We have been very happy, John Carter," she 
said, " and I thank whatever fate overtakes us chat 
it permits us to die together." 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



The next two days brought no noticeable change 
in the supply of air, but on the morning of the 
third day breathing became difficult at the higher 
altitudes of the roof tops. The avenues and plazas 
of Helium were filled with people. All business 
had ceased. For the most part the people looked 
bravely into the face of their unalterable doom. 
Here and there, however, men and women gave 
way to quiet grief. 

Toward the middle of the day many of the 
weaker commenced to succumb and within an hour 
the people of Barsoom were sinking by thousands 
into the unconsciousness which precedes death by 
asphyxiation. 

Dejah Thoris and I with the other members of 
the royal family ha3 collected in a sunken garden 
within an inner court-yard of the palace. We con 
versed in low tones, when we conversed at all, 
as the awe of the grim shadow of death crept 
over us. Even Woola seemed to feel the weight 
of the impending calamity, for he pressed close 
to Dejah Thoris and to me, whining pitifully. 

The little incubator had been brought from the 
roof of our palace at request of Dejah Thoris 
and she sat gazing longingly upon the unknown 
little life that now she would never know. 



As it was becoming perceptibly difficult to 
breathe Tardos Mors arose, saying, 

" Let us bid each other farewell. The days of 
the greatness of Barsoom are over. Tomorrow's 
sun will look down upon a dead world whicK 
through all eternity must go swinging through the 
heavens peopled not even by memories. It is the 
end." 

He stooped and kissed the women of his family, 
and laid his strong hand upon the shoulders of 
the men. 

As I turned sadly from him my eyes fell upon 
Dejah Thoris. Her head was drooping upon her 
breast, to all appearances she was lifeless. With 
a cry I sprang to her and raised her in my arms. 

Her eyes opened and looked into mine. 

"Kiss me, John Carter," she murmured. "I 
love you ! I love you ! It is cruel that we must 
be torn apart who were just starting upon a life of 
love and happiness." 

As I pressed her dear lips to mine the old feel 
ing of unconquerable power and authority rose in 
me. The fighting blood of Virginia sprang to life 
in my veins. 

" It shall not be, my princess," I cried. " There 
is, there must be some way, and John Carter, who 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



has fought his way through a strange world for 
love of you, will find it." 

And with my words there crept above the thresh.old of my conscious mind a series of nine long 
forgotten sounds. Like a flash of lightning in the 
darkness their full purport dawned upon me 
the key to the three great doors of the atmosphere 
plant 1 

Turning suddenly toward Tardos Mors as I 
still clasped my dying love to my breast I cried, 

"A flier, Jeddak! Quick! Order your swiftest 
flier to the palace top. I can save Barsoom yet." 

He did not wait to question, but in an instant 
a guard was racing to the nearest dock and though 
the air was thin and almost gone at the roof top 
they managed to launch the fastest one-man, airscout machine that the skill of Barsoom had ever 
produced. 

Kissing Dejah Thoris a dozen times and com 
manding Woola, who would have followed me, 
to remain and guard her, I bounded with my old 
agility and strength to the high ramparts of the 
palace, and in another moment I was headed 
toward the goal of the hopes of all Barsoom. 

I had to fly low to get sufficient air to breathe, 
but I took a straight course across an old sea 
[320] 



FROM JOY TO DEATH 



bottom and so had to rise only a few feet above 
the ground. 

I traveled with awful velocity for my errand 
fwas a race against time with death. The face of 
Dejah Thoris hung always before me. As I 
turned for a last look as I left the palace garden 
I had seen her stagger and sink upon the ground 
beside the little incubator. That she had dropped 
into the last coma which would end in death, if 
the air supply remained unreplenished, I well 
knew, and so, throwing caution to the winds, I 
flung overboard everything but the engine and 
compass, even to my ornaments, and lying on my 
belly along the deck with one hand on the steering 
wheel and the other pushing the speed lever to its 
last notch I split the thin air of dying Mars with 
the speed of a meteor. 

An hour before dark the great walls of the 
atmosphere plant loomed suddenly before me, and 
with a sickening thud I plunged to the ground 
before the small door which was withholding the 
spark of life from the inhabitants of an entire 
planet. 

Beside the door a great crew of men had been 
laboring to pierce the wall, but they had scarcely 
scratched the flint-like surface, and now most of 



A PRINCESS OF MARS 



them lay in the last sleep from which not even air 
would awaken them. 

Conditions seemed much worse here than at 
Helium, and it was with difficulty that I breathed 
at all. There were a few men still conscious, 
and to one of these I spoke. 

" If I can open these doors is there a man who 
can start the engines ? " I asked. 

"I can," he replied, "if you open quickly. I 
can last but a few moments more. But it is use 
less, they are both dead and no one else upon Barsoom knew the secret of these awful locks. For 
three days men crazed with fear have surged 
about this portal in vain attempts to solve its 
mystery." 

I had no time to talk, I was becoming very 
weak and it was with difficulty that I controlled 
my mind at all. 

But, with a final effort, as I sank weakly to my 
knees I hurled the nine thought waves at that 
awful thing before me. The Martian had crawled 
to my side and with staring eyes fixed on the single 
panel before us we waited in the silence of death. 

Slowly the mighty door receded before us. I 
attempted to rise and follow it but I was too 
weak. 

[322] 



FROM JOY TO DEATH 



"After it," I cried to my companion, "and if 
you reach the pump room turn loose all the pumps. 
It is the only chance Barsoom has to exist to 
morrow! " 

From where I lay I opened the second door, 
and then the third, and as I saw the hope of Bar 
soom crawling weakly on hands and knees through 
the last doorway I sank unconscious upon the 
ground. 



[323] 



CHAPTER XXVIII 

AT THE ARIZONA CAVE 

IT was dark when I opened my eyes again. 
Strange, stiff garments were upon my body; 
garments that cracked and powdered away from 
me as I rose to a sitting posture. 

I felt myself over from head to foot and from 
head to foot I was clothed, though when I fell 
unconscious at the little doorway I had been 
naked. Before me was a small patch of moonlit 
sky which showed through a ragged aperture. 

As my hands passed over my body they came 
in contact with pockets and in one of these a small 
parcel of matches wrapped in oiled paper. One of 
these matches I struck, and its dim flame lighted 
up what appeared to be a huge cave, toward the 
back of which I discovered a strange, still figure 
huddled over a tiny bench. As I approached it 
I saw that it was the dead and mummified remains 
of a little old woman with long black hair, and 
the thing it leaned over was a small charcoal burner 
upon which rested a round copper vessel contain 
ing a small quantity of greenish powder. 
[34] 



AT THE ARIZONA CAFE 



Behind her, depending from the roof upon raw 
hide thongs, and stretching entirely across the 
cave, was a row of human skeletons. From the 
thong which held them stretched another to the 
dead hand of the little old woman; as I touched 
the cord the skeletons swung to the motion with, 
a noise as of the rustling of dry leaves. 

It was a most grotesque and horrid tableau 
and I hastened out into the fresh air; glad to 
escape from so gruesome a place. 

The sight that met my eyes as I stepped out 
upon a small ledge which ran before the entrance 
of the cave filled me with consternation. 

A new heaven and a new landscape met my 
gaze. The silvered mountains in the distance, 
the almost stationary moon hanging in the sky, 
the cacti-studded valley below me were not of 
Mars. I could scarce believe my eyes, but the 
truth slowly forced itself upon me I was look 
ing upon Arizona from the same ledge from which 
ten years before I had gazed with longing upon 
Mars. 

Burying my head in my arms I turned, broken, 
and sorrowful, down the trail from the cave. 

Above me shone the red eye of Mars holding 
her awful secret, forty-eight million miles away. 
[325] 



'A PRINCESS OF MARS 



Did the Martian reach the pump room? Did 
the vitalizing air reach the people of that dis 
tant planet in time to save them? Was my Dejah 
Thoris alive, or did her beautiful body lie cold in 
death beside the tiny golden incubator in the 
sunken garden of the inner courtyard of the palace 
of Tardos Mors, the jeddak of Helium? 

For ten years I have waited and prayed for an 
answer to my questions. For ten years I have 
waited and prayed to be taken back to the world 
of my lost love. I would rather lie dead beside 
her there than live on Earth all those millions of 
terrible miles from her. 

The old mine, which I found untouched, has 
made me fabulously wealthy; but what care I for 
wealth ! 

As I sit here tonight in my little study over 
looking the Hudson, just twenty years have elapsed 
since I first opened my eyes upon Mars. 

I can see her shining in the sky through the little 
window by my desk, and tonight she seems calling 
to me again as she has not called before since 
that long dead night, and I think I can see, across 
that awful abyss of space, a beautiful black-haired 
woman standing in the garden of a palace, and at 
her side is a little boy who puts his arm around 
[326] 



AT THE ARIZONA CAFE 



her as she points into the sky toward the planet 
Earth, while at their feet is a huge and hideous 
creature with a heart of gold. 

I believe that they are waiting there for me, 
and something tells me that I shall soon know. 



THE END 



THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

2 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

variance is Destiny with all the little plans of 
men. 

I may perhaps mention here that very recently I had come an ugly cropper in certain 
business enterprises. Sitting now surrounded 
by all the circumstances of wealth, there is 
a luxury in admitting my extremity. I can 
admit, even, that to a certain extent my disasters were conceivably of my own making. It 
may be there are directions in which I have 
some capacity, but the conduct of business 
operations is not among these. But in those 
days I was young, and my youth among other 
objectionable forms took that of a pride in my 
capacity for affairs. I am young still in years, 
but the things that have happened to me have 
rubbed something of the youth from my mind. 
Whether they have brought any wisdom to 
light below it is a more doubtful matter. 

It is scarcely necessary to go into the details 
of the speculations that landed me at Lympne, 
in Kent. Nowadays even about business transactions there is a strong spice of adventure. 
I took risks. In these things there is invariably a certain amount of give and take, and it 
fell to me finally to do the giving. Reluctantly 
enough. Even when I had got out of everything, one cantankerous creditor saw fit to be 



MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR 3 

malignant. Perhaps you have met that flaming 
sense of outraged virtue, or perhaps you have 
only felt it. He ran me hard. It seemed to 
me, at last, that there was nothing for it but to 
write a play, unless I wanted to drudge for my 
living as a clerk. I have a certain imagination, 
and luxurious tastes, and I meant to make a 
vigorous fight for it before that fate overtook 
me. In addition to my belief in my powers as 
a business man, I had always in those days had 
an idea that I was equal to writing a very good 
play. It is not, I believe, a very uncommon 
persuasion. I knew there is nothing a man 
can do outside legitimate business transactions 
that has such opulent possibilities, and very 
probably that biased my opinion. I had, indeed, got into the habit of regarding this unwritten drama as a convenient little reserve 
put by for a rainy day. That rainy day had 
come and I set to work. 

I soon discovered that writing a play was a 
longer business than I had supposed ; at first 
I had reckoned ten days for it, and it was to 
have a pied-a-terre while it was in hand that I 
came to Lympne. I reckoned myself lucky in 
getting that little bungalow. I got it on a 
three years' agreement. I put in a few sticks 
of furniture, and while the play was in hand 



4 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

I did my own cooking. My cooking would 
have shocked Mrs. Bond. And yet, you know, 
it had flavour. I had a coffee-pot, a sauce-pan 
for eggs, and one for potatoes, and a fryingpan for sausages and bacon  such was the 
simple apparatus of my comfort. One cannot 
always be magnificent, but simplicity is always 
a possible alternative. For the rest I laid in 
an eighteen-gallon cask of beer on credit, and 
a trustful baker came each day. It was not, 
perhaps, in the style of Sybaris, but I have 
had worse times. I was a little sorry for the 
baker, who was a very decent man indeed, but 
even for him I hoped. 

Certainly if any one wants solitude, the place 
is Lympne. It is in the clay part of Kent, and 
my bungalow stood on the edge of an old sea 
cliff and stared across the flats of Romney 
Marsh at the sea. In very wet weather the 
place is almost inaccessible, and I have heard 
that at times the postman used to traverse the 
more succulent portions of his route with boards 
upon his feet. I never saw him doing so, but 
I can quite imagine it. Outside the doors of 
the few cottages and houses that make up the 
present village big birch besoms are stuck, to 
wipe off the worst of the clay, which will give 
some idea of the texture of the district. I 



MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR 5 

doubt if the place would be there at all, if it 
were not a fading memory of things gone for 
ever. It was the big port of England in 
Roman times, Portus Lemanus, and now the 
sea is four miles away. All down the steep 
hill are boulders and masses of Roman brickwork, and from it old Watling Street, still 
paved in places, starts like an arrow to the 
north. I used to stand on the hill and think 
of it all, the galleys and legions, the captives 
and officials, the women and traders, the speculators like myself, all the swarm and tumult 
that came clanking in and out of the harbour. 
And now just a few lumps of rubble on a 
grassy slope, and a sheep or two  and me ! 
And where the port had been were the levels 
of the marsh, sweeping round in a broad curve 
to distant Dungeness, and dotted here and 
there with tree clumps and the church towers 
of old mediaeval towns that are following 
Lemanus now towards extinction. 

That outlook on the marsh was, indeed, one 
of the finest views I have ever seen. I suppose Dungeness was fifteen miles away ; it 
lay like a raft on the sea, and further westward 
were the hills by Hastings under the setting 
sun. Sometimes they hung close and clear, 
sometimes they were faded and low, and often 



6 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

the drift of the weather took them clean out of 
sight. And all the nearer parts of the marsh 
were laced and lit by ditches and canals. 

The window at which I worked looked over 
the skyline of this crest, and it was from this 
window that I first set eyes on Cavor. It 
was just as I was struggling with my scenario, 
holding down my mind to the sheer hard work 
of it, and naturally enough he arrested my 
attention. 

The sun had set, the sky was a vivid tranquillity of green and yellow, and against that 
he came out black  the oddest little figure. 

He was a short, round-bodied, thin-legged 
little man, with a jerky quality in his motions ; 
he had seen fit to clothe his extraordinary 
mind in a cricket cap, an overcoat, and cycling 
knickerbockers and stockings. Why he did 
so I do not know, for he never cycled and he 
never played cricket. It was a fortuitous 
concurrence of garments, arising I know not 
how. He gesticulated with his hands and 
arms, and jerked his head about and buzzed. 
He buzzed like something electric. You 
never heard such buzzing. And ever and 
again he cleared his throat with a most extraordinary noise. 

There had been rain, and that spasmodic 




if  



" He gesticulated with his hands and arms " 



MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR 7 

walk of his was enhanced by the extreme 
sHpperiness of the footpath. Exactly as he 
came against the sun he stopped, pulled out 
a watch, hesitated. Then with a sort of 
convulsive gesture he turned and retreated 
with every manifestation of haste, no longer 
gesticulating, but going with ample strides 
that showed the relatively large size of his 
feet  they were, I remember, grotesquely exaggerated in size by adhesive clay  to the 
best possible advantage. 

This occurred on the first day of my sojourn, 
when my play- writing energy was at its height, 
and I regarded the incident simply as an 
annoying distraction  the waste of five minutes. 
I returned to my scenario. But when next 
evening the apparition was repeated with remarkable precision, and again the next evening, and indeed every evening when rain was 
not falling, concentration upon the scenario 
became a considerable effort. "Confound the 
man," said I, "one would think he was learning to be a marionette ! " and for several 
evenings I cursed him pretty heartily. 

Then my annoyance gave way to amazement and curiosity. Why on earth should 
a man do this thino-? On the fourteenth 
evening I could stand it no longer, and so 



8 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

soon as he appeared I opened the French 
window, crossed the verandah, and directed 
myself to the point where he invariably 
stopped. 

He had his watch out as I came up to him. 
He had a chubby, rubicund face with reddish 
brown eyes  previously I had seen him only 
against the light. "One moment, sir," said I 
as he turned. 

He stared. "One moment," he said, "certainly. Or if you wish to speak to me for 
longer, and it is not asking too much  your 
moment is up  would it trouble you to accompany me ? " 

"Not in the least," said I, placing myself 
beside him. 

"My habits are regular. My time for intercourse  limited." 

" This, I presume, is your time for exer
-i ji 
cise : 

" It is. I come here to enjoy the sunset." 

"You don't." 

"Sir?" 

" You never look at it." 

" Never look at it ?" 

" No. I've watched you thirteen nights, 
and not once have you looked at the sunset 
 not once." 



MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR 9 

He knitted his brows like one who encounters a problem. 

"Well, I enjoy the sunlight  the atmosphere  I go along this path, through that 
gate"  he jerked his head over his shoulder 
 "and round " 

" You don't. You never have been. It's 
all nonsense. There isn't a way. To-night, 
for instance " 

"Oh! to-night! Let me see. Ah! I just 
glanced at my watch, saw that I had already 
been out just three minutes over the precise 
half-hour, decided there was not time to go 
round, turned " 

"You always do." 

He looked at me  reflected. " Perhaps I 
do, now I come to think of it. But what 
was it you wanted to speak to me about ? " 

"Why, this!" 

"This?" 

"Yes. Why do you do it? Every night 
you come making a noise " 

" Making a noise ? " 

" Like this "  I imitated his buzzing noise. 

He looked at me, and it was evident the 
buzzing- awakened distaste.  Do I do laf" 
he asked. 

" Every blessed evening." 



lo THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" I had no idea." 

He stopped dead. He regarded me gravely. 
"Can it be," he said, "that I have formed a 
Habit.?" 

" Well, it looks like it. Doesn't it ? " 

He pulled down his lower lip between finger 
and thumb. He regarded a puddle at his 
feet. 

" My mind is much occupied," he said. 'And you want to know zuiy ! Well, sir, I 
can assure you that not only do I not know 
why I do these things, but I did not even 
know I did them. Come to think, it is just 
as you say ; I never lave been beyond that 
field . . . And these things annoy you . " 

For some reason I was beginning to relent 
towards him. " Not annoy," I said. " But   
imagine yourself writing a play ! " 

" I couldn't." 

"Well, anything that needs concentration." 

" Ah ! " he said, " of course," and meditated. 
His expression became so eloquent of distress, 
that I relented still more. After all, there is a 
touch of aesfression in demandingr of a man 
you don't know why he hums on a public 
footpath. 

" You see," he said weakly, " it's a habit." 

"Oh, I recognise that." 




I looked back at his receding figure 



MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR, CAVOR ii 

" I must stop it." 

" But not if it puts you out. After all, I 
had no business  it's something of a liberty." 

"Not at all, sir," he said, "not at all. I 
am greatly indebted to you. I should guard 
myself against these things. In future I will. 
Could I trouble you  once again? That 
noise .'' 

"Something like this," I said. "Zuzzoo, 
zuzzoo. But really, you know " 

" I am greatly obliged to you. In fact, I 
know I am getting absurdly absent-minded. 
You are quite justified, sir  perfectly justified. 
Indeed, I am indebted to you. The thing 
shall end. And now, sir, I have already 
brought you further than I should have 
done." 

" I do hope my impertinence " 

" Not at all, sir, not at all." 

We regarded each other for a moment. I 
raised my hat and wished him a good evening. 
He responded convulsively, and so we went 
our ways. 

At the stile I looked back at his receding 
figure. His bearing had changed remarkably, 
he seemed limp, shrunken. The contrast with 
his former gesticulating, zuzzoing self took me 
in some absurd way as pathetic. I watched 



12 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

him out of sight. Then wishing very heartily 
I had kept to my own business, I returned to 
my bungalow and my play. 

The next evening I saw nothing of him, nor 
the next. But he was very much in my mind, 
and It had occurred to me that as a sentimental 
comic character he might serve a useful purpose In the development of my plot. The 
third day he called upon me. 

For a time I was puzzled to think what had 
brought him. He made indifferent conversation in the most formal way, then abruptly he 
came to business. He wanted to buy me out 
of my bungalow. 

" You see," he said, " I don't blame you in 
the least, but you've destroyed a habit, and it 
disorganises my day. I've walked past here 
for years  years. No doubt I've hummed 
. . . You've made all that impossible ! " 

I suggested he might try some other direction. 

" No. There is no other direction. This 
is the only one. I've inquired. And now  
every afternoon at four  I come to a dead 
wall." 

" But, my dear sir, if the thing is so important to you " 

"It's vital. You see, I'm  I'm an investi


MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR i 

gator  I am engaged in a scientific research. 
I live  " he paused and seemed to think. 
"Just over there," he said, and pointed 
suddenly dangerously near my eye. " The 
house with white chimneys you see just over 
the trees. And my circumstances are abnormal  abnormal. I am on the point of 
completing one of the most important demonstrations  I can assure you one of ze most 
important demonstrations that have ever been 
made. It requires constant thought, constant 
mental ease and activity. And the afternoon 
was my brightest time !  effervescing with 
new ideas  new points of view." 
 But why not come by still ? " 

"It would be all different. I should be 
self-conscious. I should think of you at your 
play  watching me irritated  instead of thinking of my work. No ! I must have the 
bungalow." 

I meditated. Naturally, I wanted to think 
the matter over thoroughly before anything 
decisive was said. I was generally ready 
enough for business in those days, and selling 
always attracted me ; but in the first place it 
was not my bungalow, and even if I sold 
it to him at a good price I might get inconvenienced in the delivery of goods if the 



14 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

current owner got wind of the transaction, 
and in the second I was, well  undischarged. 
It was clearly a business that required delicate 
handling. Moreover, the possibility of his 
being in pursuit of some valuable invention 
also interested me. It occurred to me that I 
would like to know more of this research, not 
with any dishonest intention, but simply with 
an idea that to know what it was would be a 
relief from play-writing. I threw out feelers. 

He was quite willing to supply information. 
Indeed, once he was fairly under way the conversation became a monologue. He talked 
like a man long pent up, who has had it over 
with himself again and again. He talked for 
nearly an hour, and I must confess I found it a 
pretty stiff bit of listening. But through it all 
there was the undertone of satisfaction one feels 
when one is neglecting work one has set oneself. During that first interview I gathered 
very little of the drift of his work. Half his 
words were technicalities entirely strange to 
me, and he illustrated one or two points with 
what he was pleased to call elementary mathematics, computing on an envelope with a 
copying-ink pencil, in a manner that made it 
hard even to seem to understand. " Yes," I 
said ; " yes. Go on ! " Nevertheless I made 



MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR 15 

out enough to convince me that he was no 
mere crank playing at discoveries. In spite 
of his crank-like appearance there was a force 
about him that made that impossible. Whatever it was, it was a thing with mechanical 
possibilities. He told me of a work-shed he 
had, and of three assistants  originally jobbing 
carpenters  whom he had trained. Now, from 
the work-shed to the patent office is clearly 
only one step. He invited me to see those 
things. I accepted readily, and took care, by 
a remark or so, to underline that. The proposed transfer of the bungalow remained very 
conveniently in suspense. 

At last he rose to depart, with an apology 
for the length of his call. Talking over his 
work was, he said, a pleasure enjoyed only too 
rarely. It was not often he found such an 
intelligent listener as myself, he mingled very 
little with professional scientific men. 
' So much pettiness," he explained ; " so 
much intrigue ! And really, when one has an 
idea  a novel, fertilising idea  I don't want 
to be uncharitable, but " 

I am a man who believes in impulses. I 
made what was perhaps a rash proposition. 
But you must remember that I had been alone, 
play-writing in Lympne, for fourteen days, 



1 6 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

and my compunction for his ruined walk still 
hung about me. " Why not," said I, " make 
this your new habit? In the place of the one 
I spoilt ? At least, until we can settle about 
the bungalow. What you want is to turn over 
your work in your mind. That you have 
always done during your afternoon walk. Unfortunately that's over  you can't get things 
back as they were. But why not come and 
talk about your work to me ; use me as a sort 
of wall against which you may throw your 
thoughts and catch them again ? It's certain 
I don't know enough to steal your ideas myself 
 and I know no scientific men " 

I stopped. He was considering. Evidently 
the thing attracted him. " But I'm afraid I 
should bore you," he said. 

" You think I'm too dull ? " 

" Oh no ; but technicalities " 

" Anyhow, you've interested me immensely 
this afternoon." 

" Of course it would be a great help to me. 
Nothing clears up one's ideas so much as 
explaining them. Hitherto " 

" My dear sir, say no more." 

" But really can you spare the time ? " 

" There is no rest like change of occupation," 
I said, with profound conviction. 



MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR 17 

The affair was over. On my verandah steps 
he turned. "I am already greatly indebted 
to you," he said. 

I made an interrogative noise. 

"You have completely cured me of that 
ridiculous habit of humming," he explained. 

I think I said I was glad to be of any 
service to him, and he turned away. 

Immediately the train of thought that our 
conversation had suggested must have resumed 
its sway. His arms began to wave in their 
former fashion. The faint echo of " zuzzoo " 
came back to me on the breeze. . . . 

Well, after all, that was not my affair. . . . 

He came the next day, and again the next 
day after that, and delivered two lectures on 
physics to our mutual satisfaction. He talked 
with an air of being extremely lucid about the 
"ether," and "tubes of force," and "gravitational potential," and things like that, and I sat 
in my other folding-chair and said, " Yes," 
" Go on," " I follow you," to keep him going. 
It was tremendously difficult stuff, but I do 
not think he ever suspected how much I did 
not understand him. There were moments 
when I doubted whether I was well employed, 
but at any rate I was resting from that confounded play. Now and then things gleamed 



B 



iS THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

on me clearly for a space, only to vanish just 
when I thought I had hold of them. Sometimes my attention failed altogether, and I 
would give it up and sit and stare at him, 
wondering whether, after all, it would not be 
better to use him as a central figure in a good 
farce and let all this other stuff slide. And 
then, perhaps, I would catch on again for a bit. 
At the earliest opportunity I went to see 
his house. It was large and carelessly furnished ; there were no servants other than 
his three assistants, and his dietary and private life were characterised by a philosophical 
simplicity. He was a water-drinker, a vegetarian, and all those logical disciplinary things. 
But the sight of his equipment settled many 
doubts. It looked like business from cellar 
to attic  an amazing little place to find in 
an out-of-the-way village. The ground-floor 
rooms contained benches and apparatus, the 
bakehouse and scullery boiler had developed 
into respectable furnaces, dynamos occupied 
the cellar, and there was a gasometer in the 
garden. He showed it to me with all the 
confiding zest of a man who has been living 
too much alone. His seclusion was overflowing now in an excess of confidence, and I had 
the good luck to be the recipient. 



MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR 19 

The three assistants were creditable specimens of the class of' handy-men " from which 
they came. Conscientious if unintelligent, 
strong, civil, and willing. One, Spargus, who 
did the cooking and all the metal work, had 
been a sailor ; a second, Gibbs, was a joiner ; 
and the third was an ex-jobbing gardener, and 
now general assistant. They were the merest 
labourers. All the intelligent work was done 
by Cavor. Theirs was the darkest ignorance 
compared even with my muddled impression. 

And now, as to the nature of these inquiries. 
Here, unhappily, comes a grave difficulty. I 
am no scientific expert, and if I were to 
attempt to set forth in the highly scientific 
language of Mr. Cavor the aim to which his 
experiments tended, I am afraid I should 
confuse not only the reader but myself, and 
almost certainly I should make some blunder 
that would bring upon me the mockery of 
every up-to-date student of mathematical 
physics in the country. The best thing I 
can do therefore is, I think, to give my impressions in my own inexact language, without 
any attempt to wear a garment of knowledge 
to which I have no claim. 

The object of Mr. Cavor's search was a 
substance that should be " opaque "  he used 



20 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

some other word I have forgotten, but 
" opaque " conveys the idea  to " all forms 
of radiant energy." Radiant energy," he 
made me understand, was anything like light 
or heat, or those Rontgen Rays there was so 
much talk about a year or so ago, or the 
electric waves of Marconi, or gravitation. All 
these things, he said, radiate out from centres, 
and act on bodies at a distance, whence comes 
the term " radiant energy." Now almost all 
substances are opaque to some form or other 
of radiant energy. Glass, for example, is 
transparent to light, but much less so to heat, 
so that it is useful as a fire-screen ; and alum 
is transparent to light, but blocks heat completely. A solution of iodine in carbon 
bisulphide, on the other hand, completely 
blocks light, but is quite transparent to heat. 
It will hide a fire from you, but permit all 
its warmth to reach you. Metals are not 
only opaque to light and heat, but also to 
electrical energy, which passes through both 
iodine solution and glass almost as though they 
were not interposed. And so on. 

Now all known substances are "transparent" 
to gravitation. You can use screens of various 
sorts to cut off the light or heat, or electrical 
influence of the sun, or the warmth of the earth 



MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR 2i 

from anything ; you can screen things by sheets 
of metal from Marconi's rays, but nothing will 
cut off the gravitational attraction of the sun or 
the gravitational attraction of the earth. Yet 
why there should be nothing is hard to say. 
Cavor did not see why such a substance should 
not exist, and certainly I could not tell him. 
I had never thought of such a possibility 
before. He showed me by calculations on 
paper, which Lord Kelvin, no doubt, or Professor Lodge, or Professor Karl Pearson, or 
any of those great scientific people might have 
understood, but which simply reduced me to a 
hopeless muddle, that not only was such a substance possible, but that it must satisfy certain 
conditions. It was an amazing piece of reasoning. Much as it amazed and exercised me at 
the time, it would be impossible to reproduce 
it here.' Yes," I said to it all, " yes ; go on ! " 
Suffice it for this story that he believed he 
might be able to manufacture this possible 
substance opaque to gravitation out of a complicated alloy of metals and something new  a 
new element, I fancy  called, I believe, helium, 
which was sent to him from London in sealed 
stone jars. Doubt has been thrown upon this 
detail, but I am almost certain it was helium 
he had sent him in sealed stone jars. It was 



22 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

certainly something very gaseous and thin. If 
only I had taken notes. . . . 

But then, how was I to foresee the necessity 
of taking notes ? 

Any one with the merest germ of an imagination will understand the extraordinary 
possibilities of such a substance, and will 
sympathise a little with the emotion I felt as 
this understanding emerged from the haze of 
abstruse phrases in which Cavor expressed 
himself Comic relief in a play indeed ! It 
was some time before I would believe that I 
had interpreted him aright, and I was very 
careful not to ask questions that would have 
enabled him to gauge the profundity of misunderstanding into which he dropped his daily 
exposition. But no one reading the story of 
it here will sympathise fully, because from my 
barren narrative it will be impossible to gather 
the strength of my conviction that this astonishing substance was positively going to be made. 

I do not recall that I gave my play an 
hour's consecutive work at any time after my 
visit to his house. My imagination had other 
things to do. There seemed no limit to the 
possibilities of the stuff; whichever way I tried 
I came on miracles and revolutions. For 
example, if one wanted to lift a weight, how


MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR 23 

ever enormous, one had only to get a sheet of 
this substance beneath it, and one might lift it 
with a straw. My first natural impulse was to 
apply this principle to guns and ironclads, and 
all the material and methods of war, and from 
that to shipping, locomotion, building, every 
conceivable form of human industry. The 
chance that had brought me into the very birthchamber of this new time  it was an epoch, 
no less  was one of those chances that come 
once in a thousand years. The thing unrolled, it 
expanded and expanded. Among other things 
I saw in it my redemption as a business man. 
I saw a parent company, and daughter companies, applications to right of us, applications 
to left, rings and trusts, privileges and concessions spreading and spreading, until one 
vast, stupendous Cavorite company ran and 
ruled the world. 

And I was in it ! 

I took my line straight away. I knew I was 
staking everything, but I jumped there and then. 

" We're on absolutely the biggest thing that 
has ever been invented," I said, and put the 
accent on " we." "If you want to keep me 
out of this, you'll have to do it with a gun. 
I'm coming down to be your fourth labourer 
to-morrow." 



24 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

He seemed surprised at my enthusiasm, but 
not a bit suspicious or hostile. Rather, he was 
self-depreciatory. 

He looked at me doubtfully. " But do you 
really think  ?" he said. "And your play! 
How about that play ? " 

"It's vanished!" I cried. "My dear sir, 
don't you see what you've got ? Don't you 
see what you're going to do ? " 

That was merely a rhetorical turn, but 
positively, he didn't. At first I could not believe it. He had not had the beginning of the 
inkling of an idea. This astonishing little 
man had been working on purely theoretical 
grounds the whole time ! When he said it 
was " the most important " research the world 
had ever seen, he simply meant it squared up 
so many theories, settled so much that was in 
doubt ; he had troubled no more about the 
application of the stuff he was ! going to turn 
out than if he had been a machine that makes 
guns. This was a possible substance, and he 
was going to make it! Va totU, as the 
Frenchman says. 

Beyond that, he was childish! If he made 
it, it would go down to posterity as Cavorite or 
Cavorine, and he would be made an F.R.S., 
and his portrait given away as a scientific 



MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR 25 

worthy with Nature, and things like that. 
And that was all he saw! He would have 
dropped this bombshell into the world as 
though he had discovered a new species of 
gnat, if it had not happened that I had come 
along. And there it would have lain and 
fizzled, like one or two other litde things 
these scientific people have lit and dropped 
about us. 

When I realised this, it was I did the 
talking, and Cavor who said "Go on!" I 
jumped up. I paced the room, gesticulating 
like a boy of twenty. I tried to make him 
understand his duties and responsibilities in the 
matter  our duties and responsibilities in the 
matter. I assured him we might make wealth 
enough to work any sort of social revolution 
we fancied, we might own and order the whole 
world. I told him of companies and patents, 
and the case for secret processes. All these 
things seemed to take him much as his mathematics had taken me. A look of perplexity 
came into his ruddy litde face. He stammered 
something about indifference to wealth, but I 
brushed all that aside. He had got to be rich, 
and it was no good his stammering. I gave 
him to understand the sort of man I was, and 
that I had had very considerable business 



26 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

experience. I did not tell him I was an undischarged bankrupt at the time, because that 
was temporary, but I think I reconciled my 
evident poverty with my financial claims. And 
quite insensibly, in the way such projects 
grow, the understanding of a Cavorite monopoly grew up between us. He was to make 
the stuff, and I was to make the boom. 

I stuck like a leech to the "we"  "you" 
and " I " didn't exist for me. 

His idea was, that the profits I spoke of 
might go to endow research, but that, of course, 
was a matter we had to settle later. " That's 
all right," I shouted, "that's all right." The 
great point, as I insisted, was to get the thing 
done. 

" Here is a substance," I cried, " no home, 
no factory, no fortress, no ship can dare to 
be without  more universally applicable even 
than a patent medicine ! There isn't a solitary 
aspect of it, not one of its ten thousand possible 
uses that will not make us rich, Cavor, beyond 
the dreams of avarice ! " 

" No ! " he said. " I begin to see. It's extraordinary how one gets new points of view 
by talking over things ! " 

" And as it happens you have just talked to 
the right man ! " 



MR. BEDFORD MEETS MR. CAVOR 27 

" I suppose no one," he said, " is absolutely 
averse to enormous wealth. Of course there is 
one thing " 

He paused. I stood still. 

' It is just possible, you know, that we may 
not be able to make it after all ! It may be 
one of those things that are a theoretical possibility, but a practical absurdity. Or when we 
make it, there may be some litde hitch ! " 

" We'll tackle the hitch when it comes," 
said I. 



II 

THE FIRST MAKING OF CAVORITE 

But Cavor's fears were groundless, so far as 
the actual making was concerned. On the 
14th of October 1899 this incredible substance 
was made ! 

Oddly enough, it was made at last by accident, when Mr. Cavor least expected it. He 
had fused together a number of metals and 
certain other things  I wish I knew the particulars now !  and he intended to leave the 
mixture a week and then allow it to cool slowly. 
Unless he had miscalculated, the last stage in 
the combination would occur when the stuff 
sank to a temperature of 60 Fahr. But it 
chanced that, unknown to Cavor, dissension had 
arisen about the furnace tending. Gibbs, who 
had previously seen to this, had suddenly attempted to shift it to the man who had been a 
gardener, on the score that coal was soil, being 
dug, and therefore could not possibly fall within 

the province of a joiner ; the man who had 

28 



THE FIRST MAKING OF CAVORITE 29 

been a jobbing gardener alleged, however, that 
coal was a metallic or ore-like substance, let 
alone that he was cook. But Spargus insisted 
on Gibbs doing the coaling, seeing that he was 
a joiner and that coal is notoriously fossil wood. 
Consequently Gibbs ceased to replenish the 
furnace, and no one else did so, and Cavor was 
too much immersed in certain interesting problems concerning a Cavorite flying machine 
(neglecting the resistance of the air and one or 
two other points) to perceive that anything was 
wrong. And the premature birth of his invention 
took place just as he was coming across the field 
to my bungalow for our afternoon talk and tea. 

I remember the occasion with extreme vividness. The water was boiling, and everything 
was prepared, and the sound of his "zuzzoo" 
had brought me out upon the verandah. His 
active litde figure was black against the autumnal sunset, and to the right the chimneys of 
his house just rose above a gloriously tinted 
group of trees. Remoter rose the Wealden 
Hills, faint and blue, while to the left the hazy 
marsh spread out spacious and serene. And 
then ! 

The chimneys jerked heavenward, smashing 
into a string of bricks as they rose, and the 
roof and a miscellany of furniture followed. 



30 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

Then overtaking them came a huge white 
flame. The trees about the building swayed 
and whirled and tore themselves to pieces, 
that sprang towards the flare. My ears were 
smitten with a clap of thunder that left me 
deaf on one side for life, and all about me 
windows smashed, unheeded. 

I took three steps from the verandah towards 
Cavor's house, and even as I did so came the 
wind. 

Instantly my coat tails were over my head, 
and I was progressing in great leaps and bounds, 
and quite against my will, towards him. In the 
same moment the discoverer was seized, whirled 
about, and flew through the screaming air. I 
saw one of my chimney pots hit the ground 
within six yards of me, leap a score of feet, and 
so hurry in great strides towards the focus of 
the disturbance. Cavor, kicking and flapping, 
came down again, rolled over and over on the 
ground for a space, struggled up and was lifted 
and borne forward at an enormous velocity, 
vanishing at last among the labouring, lashing 
trees that writhed about his house. 

A mass of smoke and ashes, and a square of 
bluish shining substance rushed up towards the 
zenith. A large fragment of fencing came sailing past me, dropped edgeways, hit the ground 



THE FIRST MAKING OF CAVORITE 31 

and fell flat, and then the worst was over. The 
aerial commotion fell swiftly until it was a mere 
strong gale, and I became once more aware that 
I had breath and feet. By leaning back against 
the wind I managed to stop, and could collect 
such wits as still remained to me. 

In that instant the whole face of the world 
had changed. The tranquil sunset had vanished, the sky was dark with scurrying clouds, 
everything was flattened and swaying with the 
gale. I glanced back to see if my bungalow 
was still in a general way standing, then staggered forward towards the trees amongst which 
Cavor had vanished, and through whose tall 
and leaf-denuded branches shone the flames of 
his burning house. 

I entered the copse, dashing from one tree 
to another and clinging to them, and for a 
space I sought him in vain. Then amidst a 
heap of smashed branches and fencing that 
had banked itself against a portion of his 
garden wall I perceived something stir. I 
made a run for this, but before I reached it 
a brown object separated itself, rose on two 
muddy legs and protruded two drooping, bleeding hands. Some tattered ends of garment 
fluttered out from its middle portion and 
streamed before the wind. 



32 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

For a moment I did not recognise this earthy 
lump, and then I saw that it was Cavor, caked 
in the mud in which he had rolled. He leant 
forward against the wind, rubbing the dirt from 
his eyes and mouth. 

He extended a muddy lump of hand, and 
staggered a pace towards me. His face worked 
with emotion, little lumps of mud kept falling 
from it. He looked as damaged and pitiful 
as any living creature I have ever seen, and 
his remark therefore amazed me exceeding. ' Gratulate me," he gasped ; " gratulate me ! " 

"Congratulate you!" said I. "Good 
heavens ! What for . " 

" I've done it." 

" You Aave. What on earth caused that 
explosion ? " 

A gust of wind blew his words away. I 
understood him to say that it wasn't an explosion at all. The wind hurled me into collision with him, and we stood clinging to one 
another. 

" Try and get back to my bungalow," I 
bawled in his ear. He did not hear me, 
and shouted something about "three martyrs 
 science," and also something about " not 
much ofood." At the time he laboured under 
the impression that his three attendants had 



THE FIRST MAKING OF CAVORITE 33 

perished in the whirlwind. Happily this was 
incorrect. Directly he had left for my bungalow they had gone off to the public-house in 
Lympne to discuss the question of the furnaces 
over some trivial refreshment. 

I repeated my suggestion of getting back to 
my bungalow, and this time he understood. 
We clung arm-in-arm and started, and managed at last to reach the shelter of as much 
roof as was left to me. For a space we sat in 
arm-chairs and panted. All the windows were 
broken, and the lighter articles of furniture 
were in great disorder, but no irrevocable 
damage was done. Happily the kitchen door 
had stood the pressure upon it, so that all my 
crockery and cooking materials had survived. 
The oil stove was still burning, and I put on 
the water to boil again for tea. And that prepared, I could turn on Cavor for his explanation. 

" Quite correct," he insisted ; "quite correct. 
I've done it, and it's all right." 

"But," I protested. "All right! Why, 
there can't be a rick standing, or a fence or 
a thatched roof undamaged for twenty miles 
round. . . ." 

" It's all right  really. I didn't, of course, 
foresee this little upset. My mind was preoccupied with another problem, and I'm apt 

c 



34 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

to disregard these practical side issues. But 
it's all right " 

" My dear sir," I cried, "don't you see you've 
done thousands of pounds' worth of damage?" 

" There, I throw myself on your discretion. 
I'm not a practical man, of course, but don't 
you think they will regard it as a cyclone . " 

" But the explosion " 

"It was not an explosion. It's perfectly 
simple. Only, as I say, I'm apt to overlook 
these little things. It's that zuzzoo business 
on a larger scale. Inadvertently I made this 
substance of mine, this Cavorite, in a thin, 
wide sheet. ..." 

He paused. " You are quite clear that the 
stuff is opaque to gravitation, that it cuts off 
things from gravitating towards each other ? " 

" Yes," said I. " Yes." 

" Well, so soon as it reached a temperature 
of 60 Fahr. and the process of its manufacture was complete, the air above it, the portions 
of roof and ceiling and floor above it ceased to 
have weight. I suppose you know  everybody 
knows nowadays  that, as a usual thing, the 
air Aas weight, that it presses on everything 
at the surface of the earth, presses in all directions, with a pressure of fourteen and a half 
pounds to the square inch ? " 



THE FIRST MAKING OF CAVORITE 35 
" I know that," said I. ' Go on." 
" I know that too," he remarked. " Only 
this shows you how useless knowledge is unless you apply it. You see, over our Cavorite 
this ceased to be the case, the air there ceased 
to exert any pressure, and the air round it and 
not over the Cavorite was exerting a pressure 
of fourteen pounds and a half to the square 
inch upon this suddenly weightless air. Ah I 
you begin to see! The air all about the 
Cavorite crushed in upon the air above it with 
irresistible force. The air above the Cavorite 
was forced upward violently, the air that rushed 
in to replace it immediately lost weight, ceased 
to exert any pressure, followed suit, blew the 
ceiling through and the roof off. . . . 

"You perceive," he said, "it formed a sort 
of atmospheric fountain, a kind of chimney in 
the atmosphere. And if the Cavorite itself 
hadnt been loose and so got sucked up the 
chimney, does it occur to you what would have 
happened ? " 

I thought. -I suppose," I said, ''the air 
would be rushing up and up over that infernal 
piece of stuff now." 

"Precisely," he said. "A huge fountain " 

"Spouting into space! Good heavens! 



36 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

Why, it would have squirted all the atmosphere 
of the earth away! It would have robbed the 
world of air! It would have been the death of 
all mankind I That little lump of stuff! " 
' Not exactly into space," said Cavor, "but 
as bad  practically. It would have whipped 
the air off the world as one peels a banana, 
and flung it thousands of miles. It would 
have dropped back again, of course  but on 
an asphyxiated world ! From our point of 
view very little better than if it never came 
back ! " 

I stared. As yet I was too amazed to 
realise how all my expectations had been 
upset. "What do you mean to do now." I 
asked. 

"In the first place, if I may borrow a garden 
trowel I will remove some of this earth with 
which I am encased, and then if I may avail 
myself of your domestic conveniences I will 
have a bath. This done, we will converse 
more at leisure. It will be wise, I think"  
he laid a muddy hand on my arm  " if nothing 
were said of this affair beyond ourselves. I 
know I have caused' great damage  probably 
even dwelling-houses may be ruined here and 
there upon the country-side. But on the 
other hand, I cannot possibly pay for the 



THE FIRST MAKING OF CAVORITE 37 

damage I have done, and if the real cause 
of this is published, it will lead only to heartburning and the obstruction of my work. One 
cannot foresee everythmg, you know, and I 
cannot consent for one moment to add the 
burthen of practical considerations to my 
theorising. Later on, when you have come 
in with your practical mind, and Cavorite is 
floated  floated is the word, isn't it?  and it 
has realised all you anticipate for it, we may 
set matters right with these persons. But not 
now  not now. If no other explanation is 
offered, people, in the present unsatisfactory 
state of meteorological science, will ascribe all 
this to a cyclone ; there might be a public subscription, and as my house has collapsed and 
been burnt, I should in that case receive a 
considerable share in the compensation, which 
would be extremely helpful to the prosecution 
of our researches. But if it is known that  
caused this, there will be no public subscription, and everybody will be put out. Practically I should never get a chance of working 
in peace again. My three assistants may or 
may not have perished. That is a detail. 
If they have, it is no great loss ; they were 
more zealous than able, and this premature 
event must be largely due to their joint 



38 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

neglect of the furnace. If they have not 
perished, I doubt if they have the intelligence 
to explain the affair. They will accept the 
cyclone story. And if, during the temporary 
unfitness of my house for occupation, I may 
lodcje in one of the untenanted rooms of this 
bungalow of yours " 

He paused and regarded me. 

A man of such possibilities, I reflected, is no 
ordinary guest to entertain. 
 Perhaps," said I, rising to my feet, " we 
had better begin by looking for a trowel," 
and I led the way to the scattered vestiges of 
the oreenhouse. 

And while he was having his bath I considered the entire question alone. It was 
clear there were drawbacks to Mr. Cavor's 
society I had not foreseen. The absentmindedness that had just escaped depopulating 
the terrestrial globe, might at any moment 
result in some other grave inconvenience. On 
the other hand I was young, my affairs were 
in a mess, and I was in just the mood for 
reckless adventure  with a chance of something good at the end of it. I had quite 
settled in my mind that I was to have half at 
least in that aspect of the affair. Fortunately 
I held my bungalow, as I have already ex


THE FIRST MAKING OF CAVORITE 39 

plained, on a three-year agreement, without 
being responsible for repairs ; and my furniture, 
such as there was of it, had been hastily purchased, was unpaid for, insured, and altogether 
devoid of associations. In the end I decided 
to keep on with him, and see the business 
through. 

Certainly the aspect of things had changed 
very greatly. I no longer doubted at all the 
enormous possibilities of the substance, but 
I began to have doubts about the gun-carriage 
and the patent boots. 

We set to work at once to reconstruct his 
laboratory and proceed with our experiments. 
Cavor talked more on my level than he had 
ever done before, when it came to the question 
of how we should make the stuff next. 

" Of course we must make it again," he 
said, with a sort of glee I had not expected in 
him, of course we must make it again. We 
have caught a Tartar, perhaps, but we have 
left the theoretical behind us for good and all. 
If we can possibly avoid wrecking this little 
planet of ours, we will. But  there 7nus be 
risks! There must be. In experimental work 
there always are. And here, as a practical 
man, you must come in. For my own part 
it seems to me we might make it edgeways. 



40 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

perhaps, and very thin. Yet I don't know. I 
have a certain dim perception of another 
method. I can hardly explain it yet. But 
curiously enough it came into my mind, while 
I was rolling over and over in the mud before 
the wind, and very doubtful how the whole 
adventure was to end, as being absolutely the 
thing I ought to have done." 

Even with my aid we found some little 
difficulty, and meanwhile we kept at work 
restoring the laboratory. There was plenty 
to do before it was absolutely necessary to 
decide upon the precise form and method of 
our second attempt. Our only hitch was the 
strike of the three labourers, who objected to 
my activity as a foreman. But that matter 
we compromised after two days' delay. 



Ill 

THE BUILDING OF THE SPHERE 

I REMEMBER the occasion very distinctly when 
Cavor told me of his idea of the sphere. He 
had had intimations of it before, but at the 
time it seemed to come to him in a rush. We 
were returning to the bungalow for tea, and 
on the way he fell humming. Suddenly he 
shouted, " That's ft ! That finishes it ! A 
sort of roller blind ! " 

" Finishes what ? " I asked. 

" Space  anywhere ! The moon ! " 

" What do you mean ? " 

" Mean ? Why  it must be a sphere ! 
That's what I mean ! " 

I saw I was out of it, and for a time I let 
him talk in his own fashion. I hadn't the 
ghost of an idea then of his drift. But after 
he had taken tea he made it clear to me. 

" It's like this," he said. " Last time I ran 
this stuff that cuts things off from gravitation 
into a flat tank with an overlap that held it 



42 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

down. And direcdy it had cooled and the 
manufacture was completed all that uproar 
happened, nothing above it weighed anything, 
the air went squirting up, the house squirted 
up, and if the stuff itself hadn't squirted up 
too, I don't know what would have happened ! 
But suppose the substance is loose, and quite 
free to go up ? " 

" It will go up at once ! " 
' Exactly. With no more disturbance than 
firing a big gun." 
' But what good will that do.-" 

" I'm going up with it!" 

I put down my teacup and stared at him. 

"Imagine a sphere," he explained, "large 
enough to hold two people and their luggage. 
It will be made of steel lined with thick glass ; 
it will contain a proper store of solidified air, 
concentrated food, water-distilling apparatus, 
and so forth. And enamelled, as it were, on 
the outer steel " 

" Cavorite ? " 

" Yes." 

" But how will you get inside ? " 

" There was a similar problem about a 
dumpling." 
 Yes, I know. But how ? " 

" That's perfectly easy. An air-tight man


THE BUILDING OF THE SPHERE 43 

hole is all that is needed. That, of course, 
will have to be a little complicated ; there 
will have to be a valve, so that things may be 
thrown out, if necessary, without much loss 
of air." 

" Like Jules Verne's thing in ' A Trip to the 
Moon ' ? " 

But Cavor was not a reader of fiction. 
' I begin to see," I said slowly. " And you 
could get in and screw yourself up while the 
Cavorite was warm, and as soon as it cooled it 
would become impervious to gravitation, and 
off you would fly " 
 At a tangent." 

" You would go off in a straight line  " I 
stopped abruptly. "What is to prevent the 
thing travelling in a straight line into space 
for ever ? " I asked. " You're not safe to 
get anywhere, and if you do  how will you 
get back ? " 

"I've just thought of that," said Cavor. 
"That's what I meant when I said the thing 
is finished. The inner glass sphere can be 
air-tight and, except for the manhole, continuous, and the steel sphere can be made in 
sections, each section capable of rolling up 
after the fashion of a roller blind. These 
can easily be worked by springs, and released 



44 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

and checked by electricity conveyed by platinum wires fused through the glass. All that 
is merely a question of detail. So you see, 
that except for the thickness of the blind 
rollers, the Cavorite exterior of the sphere 
will consist of windows or blinds, whichever 
you like to call them. Well, when all these 
windows or blinds are shut, no light, no heat, 
no gravitation, no radiant energy of any sort 
will get at the inside of the sphere, it will fly 
on through space in a straight line, as you say. 
But open a window, imagine one of the windows open ! Then at once any heavy body 
that chances to be in that direction will attract 
us 

I sat taking it in. 

" You see ? " he said. 

" Oh, I see." 
' Practically we shall be able to tack about 
in space just as we wish. Get attracted by 
this and that." 

" Oh yes. Thafs clear enough. Only " 

" Well ? " 

" I don't quite see what we shall do it for ! 
It's really only jumping off the world and back 
again." 

"Surely! For example, one might go to 
the moon." 



THE BUILDING OF THE SPHERE 45 
' And when one got there ! What would 
you find ? " 

"We should see  Oh! consider the new 
knowledge." 

" Is there air there?" 

" There may be." 

" It's a fine idea," I said, " but it strikes me 
as a large order all the same. The moon ! I'd 
much rather try some smaller things first." 

" They're out of the question, because of 
the air difficulty." 

" Why not apply that idea of spring blinds 
 Cavorite blinds in strong steel cases  to 
lifting weights ? " 
 It wouldn't work," he insisted. " After all, 
to go into outer space is not so much worse, if 
at all, than a polar expedition. Men go on 
polar expeditions." 

" Not business men. And besides, they get 
paid for polar expeditions. And if anything 
goes wrong there are relief parties. But this 
 it's just firing ourselves off the world for 
nothing." 

" Call it prospecting." 

"You'll have to call it that. . . . One 
might make a book of it perhaps," I said. 

" I have no doubt there will be minerals," 
said Cavor. 



46 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 
' For example ? " 
' Oh ! sulphur, ores, gold perhaps, possiblynew elements." 

"Cost of carriage," I said. "You know 
you're nol a practical man. The moon's a 
quarter of a million miles away." 

"It seems to me it wouldn't cost much 
to cart any weight anywhere if you packed 
it in a Cavorite case." 

I had not thought of that. " Delivered 
free on head of purchaser, eh ? " 

"It isn't as though we were confined to the 
moon." 

" You mean " 

" There's Mars  clear atmosphere, novel 
surroundings, exhilarating sense of lightness. 
It might be pleasant to go there." 

"Is there air on Mars ? " 

" Oh yes ! " 

' Seems as though you might run it as a 
sanatorium. By the way, how far is Mars ? " 

" Two hundred million miles at present," 
said Cavor airily; "and you go close by the 
sun." 

My imagination was picking itself up again. 
" After all," I said, " there's something in 
these things. There's travel " 

An extraordinary possibility came rushing 



THE BUILDING OF THE SPHERE 47 

into my mind. Suddenly I saw, as in a vision, 
the whole solar system threaded with Cavorite 
liners and spheres de luxe. " Rights of preemption," came floating into my head  planetary rights of pre-emption. I recalled the old 
Spanish monopoly in American gold. It 
wasn't as though it was just this planet or 
that  it was all of them. I stared at Cavor's 
rubicund face, and suddenly my imagination 
was leaping and dancing. I stood up, I 
walked up and down ; my tongue was unloosened. 

" I'm beginning to take it in," I said ; "I'm 
beginning to take it in." The transition from 
doubt to enthusiasm seemed to take scarcely 
any time at all. " But this is tremendous ! " 
I cried. " This is Imperial ! I haven't been 
dreaming of this sort of thing." 

Once the chill of my opposition was removed, 
his own pent-up excitement had play. He too 
got up and paced. He too gesticulated and 
shouted. We behaved like men inspired. We 
were men inspired. 

" We'll settle all that ! " he said in answer 
to some incidental difficulty that had pulled me 
up. " We'll soon settle all that ! We'll start 
the drawings for mouldings this very night." 

" We'll start them now," I responded, and 



48 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

we hurried off to the laboratory to begin upon 
this work forthwith. 

I was like a child in Wonderland all that 
night. The dawn found us both still at work 
 we kept our electric light going heedless 
of the day. I remember now exactly how 
those drawings looked. I shaded and tinted, 
while Cavor drew  smudged and haste-marked 
they were in every line, but wonderfully correct. 
We got out the orders for the steel blinds and 
frames we needed from that night's work, and 
the glass sphere was designed within a week. 
We gave up our afternoon conversations and 
our old routine altogether. We worked, and 
we slept and ate when we could work no 
longer for hunger and fatigue. Our enthusiasm 
infected even our three men, though they had 
no idea what the sphere was for. Through 
those days the man Gibbs gave up walking, 
and went everywhere, even across the room, 
at a sort of fussy run. 

And it grew  the sphere. December 
passed, January  I spent a day with a broom 
sweeping a path through the snow from 
bungalow to laboratory  February, March. 
By the end of March the completion was in 
sight. In January had come a team of horses, 
a huge packing-case ; we had our thick glass 



THE BUILDING OF THE SPHERE 49 

sphere now ready, and in position under the 
crane we had rigged to sHng it into the steel 
shell. All the bars and blinds of the steel 
shell  it was not really a spherical shell, but 
polyhedral, with a roller blind to each facet 
 had arrived by February, and the lower 
half was bolted together. The Cavorite was 
half made by March, the metallic paste had 
gone through two of the stages in its manufacture, and we had plastered quite half of it 
on to the steel bars and blinds. It was 
astonishing how closely we kept to the lines 
of Cavor's first inspiration in working out 
the scheme. When the bolting together of 
the sphere was finished, he proposed to remove 
the rough roof of the temporary laboratory in 
which the work was done, and build a furnace about it. So the last stage of Cavorite 
making, in which the paste is heated to a 
dull red glow in a stream of helium, would 
be accomplished when it was already on the 
sphere. 

And then we had to discuss and decide 
what provisions we were to take  compressed 
foods, concentrated essences, steel cylinders 
containing reserve oxygen, an arrangement 
for removing carbonic acid and waste from 
the air and restoring oxygen by means of 

D 



50 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

sodium peroxide, water condensers, and so 
forth. I remember the little heap they made 
in the corner  tins, and rolls, and boxes  convincingly matter-of-fact. 

It was a strenuous time, with little chance 
of thinking. But one day, when we were 
drawing near the end, an odd mood came 
over me. I had been bricking up the furnace 
all the morning, and I sat down by these 
possessions dead beat. Everything seemed 
dull and incredible. 

" But look here, Cavor," I said. " After 
all! What's it all for?" 

He smiled. " The thing now is to go." 

"The moon," I reflected. "But what do 
you expect? I thought the moon was a 
dead world." 

He shrugged his shoulders. 

" What do you expect ? " 
' We're going to see." 

''Are we?" I said, and stared before me. 

" You are tired," he remarked. " You'd 
better take a walk this afternoon." 
 No," I said obstinately ; " I'm going to 
finish this brickwork." 

And I did, and insured myself a night of 
insomnia. 

I don't think I have ever had such a night. 



THE BUILDING OF THE SPHERE 51 

I had some bad times before my business collapse, but the very worst of those was sweet 
slumber compared to this infinity of aching 
wakefulness. I was suddenly in the most enormous funk at the thing we were going to do. 

I do not remember before that night thinking at all of the risks we were running. Now 
they came like that array of spectres that once 
beleaguered Prague, and camped around me. 
The strangeness of what we were about to 
do, the unearthliness of it, overwhelmed me. 
I was like a man awakened out of pleasant 
dreams to the most horrible surroundings. 
I lay, eyes wide open, and the sphere seemed 
to get more flimsy and feeble, and Cavor more 
unreal and fantastic, and the whole enterprise 
madder and madder every moment. 

I got out of bed and wandered about. I 
sat at the window and stared at the immensity 
of space. Between the stars was the void, 
the unfathomable darkness ! I tried to recall the fragmentary knowledge of astronomy I 
had gained in my irregular reading, but it was 
all too vague to furnish any idea of the things 
we might expect. At last I got back to bed 
and snatched some moments of sleep  moments 
of nightmare rather  in which I fell and fell and 
fell for evermore into the abyss of the sky. 



52 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

I astonished Cavor at breakfast. I told 
him shortly, "I'm not coming with you in 
the sphere." 

I met all his protests with a sullen persistence.' The thing's too mad," I said, 
" and I won't come. The thing's too mad." 

I would not go with him to the laboratory. 
I fretted about my bungalow for a time, and 
then took hat and stick and set off alone, I 
knew not whither. It chanced to be a glorious 
morning : a warm wind and deep blue sky, 
the first green of spring abroad, and multitudes of birds singing. I lunched on beef 
and beer in a little public-house near Elham, 
and startled the landlord by remarking apropos 
of the weather, " A man who leaves the world 
when days of this sort are about is a fool ! " 

"That's what I says when I heerd on it!" 
said the landlord, and I found that for one 
poor soul at least this world had proved excessive, and there had been a throat-cutting. 
I went on with a new twist to my thoughts. 

In the afternoon I had a pleasant sleep in 
a sunny place, and went my way refreshed. 

I came to a comfortable-looking inn near 
Canterbury. It was bright with creepers, and 
the landlady was a clean old woman and took 
my eye. I found I had just enough money 



THE BUILDING OF THE SPHERE 53 

to pay for my lodging with her. I decided 
to stop the night there. She was a talkative body, and among many other particulars 
I learnt she had never been to London. 
"Canterbury's as far as ever I been," she 
said. " I'm not one of your gad-about sort." 

" How would you like a trip to the moon ? " 
I cried. 
 I never did hold with them ballooneys," 
she said, evidently under the impression that 
this was a common excursion enough. " I 
wouldn't go up in one  not for ever so." 

This struck me as being funny. After I 
had supped I sat on a bench by the door of 
the inn and gossiped with two labourers about 
brick-making, and motor cars, and the cricket 
of last year. And in the sky a faint new 
crescent, blue and vague as a distant Alp, 
sank westward over the sun. 

The next day I returned to Cavor. " I am 
coming," I said. " I've been a little out of 
order, that's all." 

That was the only time I felt any serious 
doubt of our enterprise. Nerves purely ! 
After that I worked a little more carefully, 
and took a trudge for an hour every day. 
And at last, save for the heating in the furnace, our labours were at an end. 



IV 

INSIDE THE SPHERE 

 Go on," said Cavor, as I sat across the edge 
of the manhole and looked down into the 
black interior of the sphere. We two were 
alone. It was evening, the sun had set, and 
the stillness of the twilight was upon everything. 

I drew my other leg inside and slid down 
the smooth glass to the bottom of the sphere, 
then turned to take the cans of food and 
other impedimenta from Cavor. The interior 
was warm, the thermometer stood at eighty, 
and as we should lose little or none of this 
by radiation, we were dressed in shoes and 
thin flannels. We had, however, a bundle 
of thick woollen clothing and several thick 
blankets to guard against mischance. By 
Cavor's direction I placed the packages, the 
cylinders of oxygen, and so forth, loosely about 
my feet, and soon we had everything in. He 
walked about the roofless shed for a time 

54 




I sat across the edge of the manhole and looked down into the 
black interior " 



INSIDE THE SPHERE 55 

seeking anything we had overlooked, and 
then crawled in after me. I noted something 
in his hand. 

" What have you got there ? " I asked. 

" Haven't you brought anything to read ? " 

' Good Lord ! No." 

" I forgot to tell you. There are uncertainties  The voyage may last  We 
may be weeks ! " 

" But " 
 We shall be floating in this sphere with 
absolutely no occupation." 
' I wish I'd known " 

He peered out of the manhole. " Look !" 
he said. " There's something there ! " 

"Is there time ? " 

" We shall be an hour." 

I looked out. It was an old number of TtBits that one of the men must have brought. 
Further away in the corner I saw a torn 
Lloyds News. I scrambled back into the 
sphere with these things. " What have you 
got?" I said. 

I took the book from his hand and read, 
" The Works of William Shakespeare." 

He coloured slighdy. " My education has 
been so purely scientific  " he said apologetically. 



56 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" Never read him ? " 

" Never." 

" He knew a little you know  in an irregular sort of way." 

" Precisely what I am told," said Cavor. 

I assisted him to screw in the glass cover of 
the manhole, and then he pressed a stud to 
close the corresponding blind in the outer case. 
The little oblong of twilight vanished. We 
were in darkness. 

For a time neither of us spoke. Although 
our case would not be impervious to sound, 
everything was very still. I perceived there 
was nothing to grip when the shock of our 
start should come, and I realised that I should 
be uncomfortable for want of a chair. 

" Why have we no chairs . " I asked. 

"I've settled all that," said Cavor. "We 
shan't need them." 

" Why not ? " 

"You will see," he said, in the tone of a 
man who refuses to talk. 

I became silent. Suddenly it had come to 
me clear and vivid that I was a fool to be 
inside that sphere. Even now, I asked myself, 
is it too late to withdraw ? The world outside 
the sphere, I knew, would be cold and inhospitable enough to me  for weeks I had been 



INSIDE THE SPHERE 57 

living on subsidies from Cavor  but after all, 
would it be as cold as the infinite zero, as inhospitable as empty space ? If it had not been 
for the appearance of cowardice, I believe that 
even then I should have made him let me out. 
But I hesitated on that score, and hesitated, 
and grew fretful and angry, and the time passed. 

There came a little jerk, a noise like champagne being uncorked in another room, and a 
faint whistling sound. For just one instant I 
had a sense of enormous tension, a transient 
conviction that my feet were pressing downward with a force of countless tons. It lasted 
for an infinitesimal time. 

But it stirred me to action. "Cavor!" I 
said into the darkness, " my nerve's in rags. 
... I don't think " 

I stopped. He made no answer. 

" Confound it ! " I cried ; " I'm a fool ! What 
business have I here? I'm not coming, Cavor. 
The thing's too risky. I'm getting out." 

" You can't," he said. 

" Can't ! We'll soon see about that ! " 

He made no answer for ten seconds. "It's 
too late for us to quarrel now, Bedford," he 
said. " That little jerk was the start. Already 
we are flying as swiftly as a bullet up into the 
gulf of space." 



58 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

"I  " I said, and then it didn't seem to 
matter what happened. For a time I was, as 
it were, stunned ; I had nothing to say. It 
was just as if I had never heard of this idea 
of leaving the world before. Then I perceived an unaccountable change in my bodily 
sensations. It was a feeling of lightness, of 
unreality. Coupled with that was a queer sensation in the head, an apoplectic effect almost, 
and a thumping of blood-vessels at the ears. 
Neither of these feelings diminished as time 
went on, but at last I got so used to them that 
I experienced no inconvenience. 

I heard a click, and a little glow lamp came 
into being. 

I saw Cavor's face, as white as I felt my 
own to be. We regarded one another in 
silence. The transparent blackness of the 
glass behind him made him seem as though 
he floated in a void. 

' Well, we're committed," I said at last. 

"Yes," he said, ''we're committed." 

" Don't move," he exclaimed, at some 
suggestion of a gesture. " Let your muscles 
keep quite lax  as if you were in bed. We 
are in a little universe of our own. Look at 
those things ! " 

He pointed to the loose cases and bundles 



INSIDE THE SPHERE 59 

that had been lying on the blankets in the 
bottom of the sphere. I was astonished to see 
that they were floating now nearly a foot from 
the spherical wall. Then I saw from his 
shadow that Cavor was no longer leaning 
against the glass. I thrust out my hand 
behind me, and found that I too was suspended in space, clear of the glass. 

I did not cry out nor gesticulate, but fear 
came upon me. It was like being held and 
lifted by something  you know not what. The 
mere touch of my hand against the glass moved 
me rapidly. I understood what had happened, 
but that did not prevent my being afraid. We 
were cut off from all exterior gravitation, only 
the attraction of objects within our sphere had 
effsct. Consequently everything that was not 
fixed to the glass was falling  slowly because 
of the slightness of our masses  towards the 
centre of gravity of our little world, which 
seemed to be somewhere about the middle of 
the sphere, but rather nearer to myself than 
Cavor, on account of my greater weight. 
'We must turn round," said Cavor, "and 
float back to back, with the things between 
us. 

It was the strangest sensation conceivable, 
floating thus loosely in space, at first indeed 



6o THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

horribly strange, and when the horror passed 
not disagreeable at all, exceeding restful ; 
indeed, the nearest thing in earthly experience 
to it that I know is lying on a very thick, soft 
feather bed. But the quality of utter detachment and independence ! I had not reckoned 
on things like this. I had expected a violent 
jerk at starting, a giddy sense of speed. Instead I felt  as if I were disembodied. It was 
not like the beginning of a journey ; it was like 
the beginning of a dream. 



V 

THE JOURNEY TO THE MOON 

Presently Cavor extinguished the light. He 
said we had not overmuch energy stored, and 
that what we had we must economise for reading. For a time, whether it was long or short 
I do not know, there was nothing but blank 
darkness. 

A question floated up out of the void. 
"How are we pointing?" I said. "What is 
our direction ? " 

" We are flying away from the earth at a 
tangent, and as the moon is near her third 
quarter we are going somewhere towards her. 
I will open a blind " 

Came a click, and then a window in the 
outer case yawned open. The sky outside 
was as black as the darkness within the sphere, 
but the shape of the open window was marked 
by an infinite number of stars. 

Those who have only seen the starry sky 
from the earth cannot imagine its appearance 



62 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

when the vague half-luminous veil of our air has 
been withdrawn. The stars we see on earth are 
the mere scattered survivors that penetrate our 
misty atmosphere. But now at last I could 
realise the meaning of the hosts of heaven ! 

Stranger things we were presently to see, 
but that airless, star-dusted sky ! Of all things, 
I think that will be one of the last I shall forget. 

The little window vanished with a click, 
another beside it snapped open and instantly 
closed, and then a third, and for a moment I 
had to close my eyes because of the blinding 
splendour of the waning moon. 

For a space I had to stare at Cavor and the 
white-lit things about me to season my eyes to 
light again, before I could turn them towards 
that pallid glare. 

Four windows were open in order that the 
gravitation of the moon might act upon all 
the substances in our sphere. I found I was 
no longer floating freely in space, but that my 
feet were resting on the glass in the direction 
of the moon. The blankets and cases of provisions were also creeping slowly down the 
glass, and presently came to rest so as to block 
out a portion of the view. It seemed to me, of 
course, that I looked "down" when I looked 
at the moon. On earth "down" means earth


THE yOURNEY TO THE MOON 63 

ward, the way things fall, and " up " the reverse 
direction. Now the pull of gravitation was 
towards the moon, and for all I knew to the 
contrary our earth was overhead. And, of 
course, when all the Cavorite blinds were 
closed, " down " was towards the centre of our 
sphere, and "up" towards its outer wall. 

It was curiously unlike earthly experience, 
too, to have the light coming up to one. On 
earth light falls from above, or comes slanting down sideways, but here it came from beneath our feet, and to see our shadows we 
had to look up. 

At first it gave me a sort of vertigo to 
stand only on thick glass and look down upon 
the moon through hundreds of thousands of 
miles of vacant space ; but this sickness passed 
very speedily. And then  the splendour of the 
sight ! 

The reader may imagine it best if he will 
lie on the ground some warm summer's night 
and look between his upraised feet at the 
moon, but for some reason, probably because 
the absence of air made it so much more 
luminous, the moon seemed already considerably larger than it does from earth. The 
minutest details of its surface were acutely 
clear. And since we did not see it through 



64 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

air, its outline was bright and sharp, there was 
no glow or halo about it, and the star-dust 
that covered the sky came right to its verymargin, and marked the outline of its unilluminated part. And as I stood and stared 
at the moon between my feet, that perception 
of the impossible that had been with me off 
and on ever since our start, returned again 
with tenfold conviction. 

"Cavor," I said, "this takes me queerly. 
Those companies we were going to run, and 
all that about minerals ? " 

" Well ? " 

" I don't see 'em here." 

" No," said Cavor ; " but you'll get over all 
that." 

" I suppose I'm made to turn right side up 
again. Still, his  For a moment I could 
half believe there never was a world." 
 That copy oi Lloyds News might help you." 

I stared at the paper for a moment, then 
held it above the level of my face, and found 
I could read it quite easily. I struck a column 
of mean little advertisements. " A gentleman 
of private means is willing to lend money," I 
read. I knew that gentleman. Then somebody eccentric wanted to sell a Cutaway bicycle, 
"quite new and cost ;i5," for five pounds; 



THE JOURNEY TO THE MOON 65 

and a lady in distress wished to dispose of some 
fish knives and forks, "a wedding present," at 
a great sacrifice. No doubt some simple soul 
was sagely examining these knives and forks, 
and another triumphantly riding off on that 
bicycle, and a third trustfully consulting that 
benevolent gentleman of means even as I read. 
I laughed, and let the paper drift from my hand. 

" Are we visible from the earth ? " I asked 

" Why ? " 

" I knew some one who was rather interested 
in astronomy. It occurred to me that it would 
be rather odd if my friend chanced to be 
looking through some telescope." 

" It would need the most powerful telescope 
on earth even now to see us as the minutest 
speck. " 

For a time I stared in silence at the moon. 

"It's a world," I said; "one feels that 
mfinitely more than one ever did on earth. 
People perhaps " 

"People!" he exclaimed. '' JVo ! Banish 
all that ! Think yourself a sort of ultra-arctic 
voyager exploring the desolate places of space. 
Look at it ! " 

He waved his hand at the shining whiteness 
below. -It's dead  dead! Vast extinct 
volcanoes, lava wildernesses, tumbled wastes 



66 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

of snow, or frozen carbonic acid, or frozen air, 
and everywhere landslip seams and cracks and 
gulfs. Nothing happens. Men have watched 
this planet systematically with telescopes for 
over two hundred years. How much change 
do you think they have seen ? " 

" None." 

" They have traced two indisputable landslips, a doubtful crack, and one slight periodic 
change of colour, and that's all.". 

" I didn't know they'd traced even that." 

 Oh yes. But as for people ! " 

" By the way," I asked,  how small a thing 
will the biggest telescopes show upon the 
moon ? " 

 One could see a fair-sized church. One 
could certainly see any towns or buildings, or 
anything like the handiwork of men. There 
might perhaps be insects, something in the 
way of ants, for example, so that they could 
hide in deep burrows from the lunar night, or 
some new sort of creatures having no earthly 
parallel. That is the most probable thing, if 
we are to find life there at all. Think of the 
difference in conditions ! Life must fit itself 
to a day as long as fourteen earthly days, a 
cloudless sun-blaze of fourteen days, and then 
a night of equal length, growing ever colder 



THE JOURNEY TO THE MOON 67 

and colder under these cold, sharp stars. In 
that night there must be cold, the ultimate 
cold, absolute zero, 273 C. below the earthlyfreezing point. Whatever life there is must 
hibernate through la and rise again each 
day." 

He mused. One can imagine something 
worm-like," he said, " taking its air solid as 
an earth-worm swallows earth, or thick-skinned 
monsters " 

" By-the-bye," I said, " why didn't we bring 
a gun ? " 

He did not answer that question.  No," 
he concluded, " we just have to go. We shall 
see when we get there." 

I remembered something. " Of course, 
there's my minerals, anyhow," I said ; whatever the conditions may be." 

Presently he told me he wished to alter our 
course a little by letting the earth tug at us for 
a moment. He was going to open one earthward blind for thirty seconds. He warned me 
that it would make my head swim, and advised 
me to extend my hands against the glass to 
break my fall. I did as he directed, and thrust 
my feet against the bales of food cases and air 
cylinders to prevent their falling upon me. 
Then with a click the window flew open. I fell 



68 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

clumsily upon hands and face, and saw for a 
moment between my black extended fingers 
our mother earth  a planet in a downward sky. 

We were still very near  Cavor told me the 
distance was perhaps eight hundred miles  and 
the huge terrestrial disk filled all heaven. But 
already it was plain to see that the world was a 
globe. The land below us was in twilight and 
vague, but westward the vast grey stretches of 
the Atlantic shone like molten silver under the 
receding day. I think I recognised the clouddimmed coast-lines of France and Spain and 
the south of England, and then, with a click, 
the shutter closed again, and I found myself in 
a state of extraordinary confusion sliding slowly 
over the smooth glass. 

When at last things settled themselves in my 
mind again, it seemed quite beyond question 
that the moon was " down " and under my feet, 
and that the earth was somewhere away on the 
level of the horizon  the earth that had been ' down " to me and my kindred since the 
beginning of things. 

So slight were the exertions required of us, 
so easy did the practical annihilation of our 
weight make all we had to do, that the necessity 
for taking refreshment did not occur to us for 
nearly six hours (by Cavor's chronometer) after 



THE JOURNEY TO THE MOON 69 

our start. I was amazed at that lapse of time. 
Even then I was satisfied with very little. 
Cavor examined the apparatus for absorbing 
carbonic acid and water, and pronounced it to 
be in satisfactory order, our consumption of 
oxygen having been extraordinarily slight. And 
our talk being exhausted for the time, and 
there being nothing further for us to do, we 
gave way to a curious drowsiness that had 
come upon us, and spreading our blankets on 
the bottom of the sphere in such a manner as 
to shut out most of the moonlight, wished each 
other good-night, and almost immediately fell 
asleep. 

And so, sleeping, and sometimes talking and 
reading a little, and at times eating, although 
without any keenness of appetite, but for the 
most part in a sort of quiescence that was 
neither waking nor slumber, we fell through a 
space of time that had neither night nor day in 
it, silently, softly, and swiftly down towards the 
moon. 

 It is a curious thing, that while we were in the sphere we 
felt not the slightest desire for food, nor did we feel the want 
of it when we abstained. At first we forced our appetites, but 
afterwards we fasted completely. Altogether we did not consume one-hundredth part of the compressed provisions we had 
brought with us. The amount of carbonic acid we breathed 
was also unnaturally low, but why this was so I am quite unable 
to explain. 



VI 

THE LANDING ON THE MOON 

I REMEMBER how One day Cavor suddenly 
opened six of our shutters and blinded me so 
that I cried aloud at him. The whole area was 
moon, a stupendous scimitar of white dawn with 
its edge hacked out by notches of darkness, the 
crescent shore of an ebbing tide of darkness, out 
of which peaks and pinnacles came climbing into 
the blaze of the sun. I take it the reader has 
seen pictures or photographs of the moon, so 
that I need not describe the broader features of 
that landscape, those spacious ringlike ranges 
vaster than any terrestrial mountains, their summits shining in the day, their shadows harsh 
and deep, the grey disordered plains, the ridges, 
hills, and craterlets, all passing at last from a 
blazing illumination into a common mystery of 
black. Athwart this world we were flying 
scarcely a hundred miles above its crests and 
pinnacles. And now we could see, what no eye 
on earth will ever see, that under the blaze of 



THE LANDING ON THE MOON 71 

the day the harsh outlines of the rocks and 
ravines of the plains and, crater floor grew grey 
and indistinct under a thickening haze, that the 
white of their lit surfaces broke into lumps and 
patches, and broke again and shrank and 
vanished, and that here and there strange tints 
of brown and olive grew and spread. 

But little time we had for watching then. 
For now we had come to the real danger of our 
journey. We had to drop ever closer to the 
moon as we spun about it, to slacken our pace 
and watch our chance, until at last we could 
dare to drop upon its surface. 

For Cavor that was a time of intense exertion ; for me it was an anxious inactivity. I 
seemed perpetually to be getting out of his way. 
He leapt about the sphere from, point to point 
with an agility that would have been impossible 
on earth. He was perpetually opening and 
closing the Cavorite windows, making calculations, consulting his chronometer by means of 
the glow lamp during those last eventful hours. 
For a long time we had all our windows closed 
and hung silently in darkness, hurling through 
space. 

Then he was feeling for the shutter studs, 
and suddenly four windows were open. I 
staggered and covered my eyes, drenched and 



72 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

scorched and blinded by the unaccustomed 
splendour of the sun beneath my feet. Then 
again the shutters snapped, leaving my brain 
spinning in a darkness that pressed against the 
eyes. And after that I floated in another vast, 
black silence. 

Then Cavor switched on the electric light, 
and told me he proposed to bind all our luggage 
together with the blankets about it, against the 
concussion of our descent. We did this with 
our windows closed, because in that way our 
goods arranged themselves naturally at the 
centre of the sphere. That too was a strange 
business ; we two men floating loose in that 
spherical space, and packing and pulling ropes. 
Imagine it if you can ! No up nor down, and 
every effort resulting in unexpected movements. 
Now I would be pressed against the glass with 
the full force of Cavor's thrust, now I would be 
kicking helplessly in a void. Now the star of 
the electric light would be overhead, now under 
foot. Now Cavor's feet would float up before 
my eyes, and now we would be crossways to 
each other. But at last our goods were safely 
bound together in a big soft bale, all except two 
blankets with head holes that we were to wrap 
about ourselves. 

Then for a flash Cavor opened a window 



THE LANDING ON THE MOON 73 

moonward, and we saw that we were dropping 
towards a huge central crater with a number of 
minor craters grouped in a sort of cross about 
it. And then again Cavor flung our little sphere 
open to the scorching, blinding sun. I think 
he was using the sun's attraction as a brake. ' Cover yourself with a blanket," he cried, 
thrusting himself from me, and for a moment I 
did not understand. 

Then I hauled the blanket from beneath my 
feet and got it about me and over my head and 
eyes. Abruptly he closed the shutters again, 
snapped one open again and closed it, then 
suddenly began snapping them all open, each 
safely into its steel roller. There came a jar, 
and then we were rolling over and over, bumping against the glass and against the big bale 
of our luggage, and clutching at each other, and 
outside some white substance splashed as if we 
were rolling down a slope of snow. . . . 

Over, clutch, bump, clutch, bump, over. . . . 

Came a thud, and I was half buried under 
the bale of our possessions, and for a space 
everything was still. Then I could hear Cavor 
puffing and grunting, and the snapping of a 
shutter in its sash. I made an effort, thrust 
back our blanket-wrapped luggage, and emerged 
from beneath it. Our open windows were 



74 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

just visible as a deeper black set with 
stars. 

We were still alive, and we were lying in the 
darkness of the shadow of the wall of the great 
crater into which we had fallen. 

We sat getting our breath again, and feeling 
the bruises on our limbs. I don't think either 
of us had had a very clear expectation of such 
rough handling as we had received. I struggled 
painfully to my feet. "And now," said I, "to 
look at the landscape of the moon ! But  ! 
It's tremendously dark, Cavor ! " 

The glass was dewy, and as I spoke I wiped 
at it with my blanket. " We're half-an-hour or 
so beyond the day," he said. " We must wait." 

It was impossible to distinguish anything. 
We might have been in a sphere of steel for 
all that we could see. My rubbing with the 
blanket simply smeared the glass, and as fast 
as I wiped it, it became opaque again with 
freshly condensed moisture mixed with an increasing quantity of blanket hairs. Of course 
I ought not to have used the blanket. In my 
efforts to clear the glass I slipped upon the 
damp surface, and hurt my shin against one of 
the oxygen cylinders that protruded from our 
bale. 

The thing was exasperating  it was absurd. 



THE LANDING ON THE MOON 75 

Here we were just arrived upon the moon, 
amidst we knew not what wonders, and all 
we could see was the grey and streaming 
wall of the bubble in which we had come. 

" Confound it ! " I said, " but at this rate 
we might have stopped at home ; " and I 
squatted on the bale and shivered, and drew 
my blanket closer about me. 

Abruptly the moisture turned to spangles 
and fronds of frost. " Can you reach the 
electric heater," said Cavor. " Yes  that 
black knob. Or we shall freeze." 

I did not wait to be told twice. "And 
now," said I, "what are we to do?" 

" Wait," he said. 

"Wait?" 

"Of course. We shall have to wait unti?! 
our air gets warm again, and then this glass 
will clear. We can't do anything till then. 
It's night here yet ; we must wait for the day to 
overtake us. Meanwhile, don't you feel hungry ? 

For a space I did not answer him, but sat 
fretting. I turned reluctantly from the smeared 
puzzle of the glass and stared at his face. 
" Yes," I said, " I am hungry. I feel somehow enormously disappointed. I had expected  I don't know what I had expected, 
but not this." 



76 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

I summoned my philosophy, and rearranging 
my blanket about me sat down on the bale 
again and began my first meal on the moon. 
I don't think I finished it  I forget. Presently, 
first in patches, then running rapidly together 
into wider spaces, came the clearing of the 
glass, came the drawing of the misty veil that 
hid the moon world from our eyes. 

We peered out upon the landscape of the 
moon. 



VII 

SUNRISE ON THE MOON 

As we saw it first it was the wildest and most 
desolate of scenes. We were in an enormous 
amphitheatre, a vast circular plain, the floor 
of the giant crater. Its cliff-like walls closed 
us in on every side. From the westward the 
light of the unseen sun fell upon them, reaching to the very foot of the cliff, and showed 
a disordered escarpment of drab and greyish 
rock, lined here and there with banks and 
crevices of snow. This was perhaps a dozen 
miles away, but at first no intervening atmosphere diminished in the slightest the minutely 
detailed brilliancy with which these things 
glared at us. They stood out clear and 
dazzling against a background of starry blackness that seemed to our earthly eyes rather 
a gloriously spangled velvet curtain than the 
spaciousness of the sky. 

The eastward cliff was at first merely a 
starless selvedge to the starry dome. No 



78 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

rosy flush, no creeping pallor, announced the 
commencing day. Only the Corona, the 
Zodiacal light, a huge cone-shaped, luminous 
haze, pointing up towards the splendour of 
the morning star, warned us of the imminent 
nearness of the sun. 

Whatever light was about us was reflected 
by the westward cliffs. It showed a huge 
undulating plain, cold and grey, a grey that 
deepened eastward into the absolute raven 
darkness of the cliff shadow. Innumerable 
rounded grey summits, ghostly hummocks, 
billows of snowy substance, stretching crest 
beyond crest into the remote obscurity, gave 
us our first inkling of the distance of the crater 
wall. These hummocks looked like snow. 
At the time I thought they were snow. But 
they were not  they were mounds and masses 
of frozen air ! 

So it was at first, and then, sudden, swift, 
and amazing, came the lunar day. 

The sunlight had crept down the cliff, it 
touched the drifted masses at its base and 
incontinently came striding with seven-leagued 
boots towards us. The distant cliff" seemed to 
shift and quiver, and at the touch of the dawn 
a reek of grey vapour poured upward from 
the crater floor, whirls and puffs and drifting 



SUNRISE ON THE MOON 79 

wraiths of grey, thicker and broader and 
denser, until at last the whole westward plain 
was steaming like a wet handkerchief held 
before the fire, and the westward cliffs were 
no more than a refracted glare beyond. 

"It is air," said Cavor. "It must be air  
or it would not rise like this  at the mere 
touch of a sunbeam. And at this pace. ..." 

He peered upwards. " Look ! " he said. 

"What.?" I asked. 

" In the sky. Already. On the blackness 
 a little touch of blue. See! The stars 
seem larger. And the little ones and all 
those dim nebulosities we saw in empty space 
 they are hidden ! " 

Swiftly, steadily the day approached us. 
Grey summit after grey summit was overtaken 
by the blaze, and turned to a smoking white 
intensity. At last there was nothing to the 
west of us but a bank of surging fog, the 
tumultuous advance and ascent of cloudy haze. 
The distant cliff had receded further and further, 
had loomed and changed through the whirl, and 
foundered and vanished at last in its confusion. 

Nearer came that steaming advance, nearer 
and nearer, coming as fast as the shadow of 
a cloud before the south-west wind. About 
us rose a thin anticipatory haze. 



8o THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

Cavor gripped my arm. 

" What ? " I said. 
' Look ! The sunrise ! The sun ! " 

He turned me about and pointed to the brow 
of the eastward cliff, looming above the haze 
about us, scarce lighter than the darkness of 
the sky. But now its line was marked by 
strange reddish shapes, tongues of vermilion 
flame that writhed and danced. I fancied it 
must be spirals of vapour that had caught the 
light and made this crest of fiery tongues 
against the sky, but indeed it was the solar 
prominences I saw, a crown of fire about the 
sun that is forever hidden from earthly eyes by 
our atmospheric veil. 

And then  the sun ! 

Steadily, inevitably came a brilliant line, 
came a thin edge of intolerable effulgence that 
took a circular shape, became a bow, became a 
blazing sceptre, and hurled a shaft of heat at 
us as though it was a spear. 

It seemed verily to stab my eyes ! I cried 
aloud and turned about blinded, groping for 
my blanket beneath the bale. 

And with that incandescence came a sound, 
the first sound that had reached us from without since we left the earth, a hissing and rustling, the stormy trailing of the aerial garment 



SUNRISE ON THE MOON 81 

of the advancing day. And with the coming 
of the sound and the light the sphere lurched, 
and blinded and dazzled we staggered helplessly against each other. It lurched again, 
and the hissing grew louder. I had shut my 
eyes perforce, I was making clumsy efforts to 
cover my head with my blanket, and this 
second lurch sent me helplessly off my feet. 
I fell against the bale, and opening my eyes 
had a momentary glimpse of the air just outside our glass. It was running  it was boiling 
 like snow into which a white-hot rod is thrust. 
What had been solid air had suddenly at the 
touch of the sun become a paste, a mud, a 
slushy liquefaction, that hissed and bubbled 
into gas. 

There came a still more violent whirl of the 
sphere, and we had clutched one another. In 
another moment we were spun about again. 
Round we went and over, and then I was on 
all fours. The lunar dawn had hold of us. It 
meant to show us little men what the moon 
could do with us. 

I caught a second glimpse of things without, 
puffs of vapour, half-liquid slush, excavated, 
sliding, falling, sliding. We dropped into 
darkness. I went down with Cavor's knees 
in my chest. Then he seemed to fly away 

F 



82 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

from me, and for a moment I lay with all the 
breath out of my body staring upward. A 
toppling crag of the melting stuff had splashed 
over us, buried us, and now it thinned and 
boiled off us. I saw the bubbles dancing on 
the glass above. I heard Cavor exclaiming 
feebly. 

Then some huge landslip in the thawing air 
had caught us, and spluttering expostulation, 
we began to roll down a slope, rolling faster 
and faster, leaping crevasses and rebounding 
from banks, faster and faster, westward into 
the white-hot boiling tumult of the lunar day. 

Clutching at one another we spun about, 
pitched this way and that, our bale of packages leaping at us, pounding at us. We collided, we gripped, we were torn asunder  our 
heads met, and the whole universe burst into 
fiery darts and stars ! On the earth we should 
have smashed one another a dozen times, but 
on the moon, luckily for us, our weight was 
only one-sixth of what it is terrestrially, and we 
fell very mercifully. I recall a sensation of 
utter sickness, a feeling as if my brain were 
upside down within my skull, and then 

Something was at work upon my face, some 
thin feelers worried my ears. Then I dis


SUNRISE ON THE MOON 83 

covered the brilliance of the landscape around 
was mitigated by blue spectacles. Cavor bent 
over me, and I saw his face upside down, his 
eyes also protected by tinted goggles. His 
breath came irregularly, and his lip was bleeding from a bruise. " Better ? " he said, wiping 
the blood with the back of his hand. 

Everything seemed swaying for a space, but 
that was simply my giddiness. I perceived 
that he had closed some of the shutters in the 
outer sphere to save me from the direct blaze 
of the sun. I was aware that everything about 
 us was very brilliant. 

" Lord ! " I gasped. " But this ! " 

I craned my neck to see. I perceived there 
was a blinding glare outside, an utter change 
from the gloomy darkness of our first impressions. " Have I been insensible long ? " I 
asked. 

" I don't know  the chronometer is broken. 
Some little time. ... My dear chap ! I have 
been afraid. . . ." 

I lay for a space taking this in. I saw his 
face still bore evidences of emotion. For a 
while I said nothing. I passed an inquisitive 
hand over my contusions, and surveyed his face 
for similar damages. The back of my right 
hand had suffered most, and was skinless and 



84 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

raw. My forehead was bruised and had bled. 
He handed me a little measure with some of 
the restorative  I forget the name of it  he 
had brought with us. After a time I felt a 
little better. I began to stretch my limbs 
carefully. Soon I could talk. 

" It wouldn't have done," I said, as though 
there had been no interval. 
' No ! it wouldntr 

He thought, his hands hanging over his 
knees. He peered through the glass and 
then stared at me. " Good Lord ! " he said. 
''Nor 
 What has happened '. " I asked after a 
pause. " Have we jumped to the tropics ? " 

" It was as I expected. This air has evaporated  if it is air. At any rate, it has 
evaporated and the surface of the moon is 
showing. We are lying on a bank of earthy 
rock. Here and there bare soil is exposed. 
A queer sort of soil ! " 

It occurred to him that it was unnecessary 
to explain. He assisted me into a sitting 
position, and I could see with my own eyes. 



VIII 

A LUNAR MORNING 

The harsh emphasis, the pitiless black and 
white of the scenery had altogether disappeared. 
The glare of the sun had taken upon itself a 
faint tinge of amber ; the shadows upon the 
cliff of the crater wall were deeply purple. To 
the eastward a dark bank of fog still crouched 
and sheltered from the sunrise, but to the westward the sky was blue and clear. I began to 
realise the length of my insensibility. 

We were no longer in a void. An atmosphere had arisen about us. The outline of 
things had gained in character, had grown 
acute and varied ; save for a shadowed space 
of white substance here and there, white substance that was no longer air but snow, the 
arctic appearance had gone altogether. Everywhere broad rusty brown spaces of bare and 
tumbled earth spread to the blaze of the sun. 
Here and there at the edge of the snowdrifts 
were transient little pools and eddies of water, 

8s 



86 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

the only things stirring in that expanse of 
barrenness. The sunlight inundated the upper 
two blinds of our sphere and turned our 
climate to high summer, but our feet were still 
in shadow, and the sphere was lying upon a 
drift of snow. 

And scattered here and there upon the slope, 
and emphasised by little white threads of unthawed snow upon their shady sides, were 
shapes like sticks, dry twisted sticks of the 
same rusty hue as the rock upon which they 
lay. That caught one's thoughts sharply. 
Sticks ! On a lifeless world ? Then as my 
eye grew more accustomed to the texture of 
their substance, I perceived that almost all this 
surface had a fibrous texture, like the carpet 
of brown needles one finds beneath the shade 
of pine trees. 

" Cavor ! " I said. 

" Yes." 

"It may be a dead world now  but 
once " 

Something arrested my attention. I had 
discovered among these needles a number of 
little round objects. And it seemed to me that 
one of these had moved. 

"Cavor," I whispered. 

"What.?" 




" We watched intensely " 



A LUNAR MORNING 87 

But I did not answer at once. I stared incredulous. For an instant I could not believe 
my eyes. I gave an inarticulate cry. I gripped 
his arm. I pointed. " Look ! " I cried, finding 
my tongue. " There ! Yes ! And there ! " 

His eyes followed my pointing finger. "Eh?" 
he said. 

How can I describe the thing I saw ? It is 
so petty a thing to state, and yet it seemed so 
wonderful, so pregnant with emotion. I have 
said that amidst the stick-like litter were these 
rounded bodies, these little oval bodies that 
might have passed as very small pebbles. And 
now first one and then another had stirred, had 
rolled over and cracked, and down the crack of 
each of them showed a minute line of yellowish 
green, thrusting outward to meet the hot encouragement of the newly-risen sun. For a 
moment that was all, and then there stirred 
and burst a third ! 

" It is a seed," said Cavor. And then I 
heard him whisper very softly, ''Life!" 

"Life!" And immediately it poured upon 
us that our vast journey had not been made 
in vain, that we had come to no arid waste 
of minerals, but to a world that lived and 
moved ! We watched intensely. I remember 
I kept rubbing the glass before me with 



88 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

my sleeve, jealous of the faintest suspicion of 
mist. 

The picture was clear and vivid only in the 
middle of the field. All about that centre the 
dead fibres and seeds were maonified and distorted by the curvature of the glass. But we 
could see enough ! One after another all down 
the sunlit slope these miraculous little brown 
bodies burst and gaped apart, like seed-pods, 
like the husks of fruits ; opened eager mouths 
that drank in the heat and light pouring in a 
cascade from the newly-risen sun. 

Every moment more of these seed coats 
ruptured, and even as they did so the swelling 
pioneers overflowed their rent-distended seedcases, and passed into the second stage of 
growth. With a steady assurance, a swift deliberation, these amazing seeds thrust a rootlet 
downward to the earth and a queer little bundlelike bud into the air. In a little while the 
whole slope was dotted with minute plantlets 
standing at attention in the blaze of the sun. 

They did not stand for long. The bundlelike buds swelled and strained and opened with 
a jerk, thrusting out a coronet of little sharp 
tips, spreading a whorl of tiny, spiky, brownish 
leaves, that lengthened rapidly, lengthened 
visibly even as we watched. The movement 



A LUNAR MORNING 89 

was slower than any animal's, swifter than any 
plant's I have ever seen before. How can I 
suggest it to you  the way that growth went 
on? The leaf tips grew so that they moved 
onward even while we looked at them. The 
brown seed-case shrivelled and was absorbed 
with an equal rapidity. Have you ever on 
a cold day taken a thermometer into your 
warm hand and watched the little thread of 
mercury creep up the tube ? These moon 
plants grew like that. 

In a few minutes, as it seemed, the buds of 
the more forward of these plants had lengthened 
into a stem and were even putting forth a 
second whorl of leaves, and all the slope that 
had seemed so recently a lifeless stretch of 
litter was now dark with the stunted olivegreen herbage of bristling spikes that swayed 
with the vigour of their growing. 

I turned about, and behold ! along the upper 
edge of a rock to the eastward a similar fringe 
in a scarcely less forward condition swayed 
and bent, dark against the blinding glare of 
the sun. And beyond this fringe was the 
silhouette of a plant mass, branching clumsily 
like a cactus, and swelling visibly, swelling like 
a bladder that fills with air. 

Then to the westward also I discovered that 



90 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

another such distended form was rising over 
the scrub. But here the light fell upon its 
sleek sides, and I could see that its colour was a 
vivid orange hue. It rose as one watched it ; if 
one looked away from it for a minute and then 
back, its outline had changed ; it thrust out 
blunt congested branches until in a little time 
it rose a coralline shape of many feet in height. 
Compared with such a growth the terrestrial 
puff-ball, which will sometimes swell a foot in 
diameter in a single night, would be a hopeless 
laggard. But then the puff-ball grows against 
a gravitational pull six times that of the moon. 
Beyond, out of gullies and flats that had been 
hidden from us, but not from the quickening 
sun, over reefs and banks of shining rock, a 
bristling beard of spiky and fleshy vegetation 
was straining into view, hurrying tumultuously 
to take advantage of the brief day in which it 
must flower and fruit and seed again and die. 
It was like a miracle, that growth. So, one 
must imagine, the trees and plants arose at 
the Creation and covered the desolation of the 
new-made earth. 

Imagine it ! Imagine that dawn ! The resurrection of the frozen air, the stirring and 
quickening of the soil, and then this silent 
uprising of vegetation, this unearthly ascent of 



A LUNAR MORNING 91 

fleshiness and spikes. Conceive it all lit by a 
blaze that would make the intensest sunlight of 
earth seem watery and weak. And still around 
this stirring jungle, wherever there was shadow, 
lingered banks of bluish snow. And to have the 
picture of our impression complete, you must 
bear in mind that we saw it all through a thick 
bent glass, distorting it as things are distorted 
by a lens, acute only in the centre of the picture, 
and very bright there, and towards the edges 
magnified and unreal. 



IX 

PROSPECTING BEGINS 

We ceased to gaze. We turned to each other, 
the same thought, the same question in our 
eyes. For these plants to grow, there must be 
some air, however attenuated, air that we also 
should be able to breathe. 

" The manhole ? " I said. 

" Yes ! " said Cavor, if it is air we see 1 " 

" In a little while," I said, "these plants will 
be as high as we are. Suppose  suppose after 
all  Is it certain ? How do you know that 
stuff is air? It may be nitrogen  it may be 
carbonic acid even ! " 

" That is easy," he said, and set about proving 
it. He produced a big piece of crumpled paper 
from the bale, lit it, and thrust it hastily through 
the manhole valve. I bent forward and peered 
down through the thick glass for its appearance 
outside, that little flame on whose evidence depended so much ! 

I saw the paper drop out and lie lightly upon 



PROSPECTING BEGINS 93 

the snow. The pink flame of its burning 
vanished. For an instant it seemed to be 
extinguished. And then I saw a little blue 
tongue upon the edge of it that trembled, and 
crept, and spread ! 

Quiedy the whole sheet, save where it lay in 
immediate contact with the snow, charred and 
shrivelled and sent up a quivering thread of 
smoke. There was no doubt left to me ; the 
atmosphere of the moon was either pure oxygen 
or air, and capable therefore  unless its tenuity 
was excessive  of supporting our alien life. 
We might emerge  and live ! 

I sat down with my legs on either side of 
the manhole and prepared to unscrew it, but 
Cavor stopped me. " There is first a litde 
precaution," he said. He pointed out that 
although it was certainly an oxygenated atmosphere outside, it might still be so rarified as to 
cause us grave injury. He reminded me of 
mountain sickness, and of the bleeding that 
often afflicts aeronauts who have ascended too 
swiftly, and he spent some time in the preparation of a sickly-tasting drink which he insisted 
on my sharing. It made me feel a litde numb, 
but otherwise had no effect on me. Then he 
permitted me to begin unscrewino-. 

Presently the glass stopper of the manhole 



94 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

was so far undone that the denser air within 
our sphere began to escape along the thread 
of the screw, singing as a kettle sings before it 
boils. Thereupon he made me desist. It 
speedily became evident that the pressure outside was very much less than it was within. 
How much less it was we had no means of 
telling. 

I sat grasping the stopper with both hands, 
ready to close it again if, in spite of our intense 
hope, the lunar atmosphere should after all 
prove too rarified for us, and Cavor sat with 
a cylinder of compressed oxygen at hand to 
restore our pressure. We looked at one 
another in silence, and then at the fantastic 
vegetation that swayed and grew visibly and 
noiselessly without. And ever that shrill 
piping continued. 

My blood-vessels began to throb in my ears, 
and the sound of Cavor's movements diminished. 
I noted how still everything had become, because of the thinning of the air. 

As our air sizzled out from the screw the 
moisture of it condensed in little puffs. 

Presently I experienced a peculiar shortness 
of breath, that lasted indeed during the whole 
of the time of our exposure to the moon's 
exterior atmosphere, and a rather unpleasant 



PROSPECTING BEGINS 95 

sensation about the ears and finger-nails and 
the back of the throat grew upon my attention 
and presently passed off again. 

But then came vertigo and nausea that 
abruptly changed the quality of my courao-e I 
gave the lid of the manhole half a turn and 
made a hasty explanation to Cavor; but now 
he was the more sanguine. He answered me 
in a voice that seemed extraordinarily small 
and remote, because of the thinness of the air 
that carried the sound. He recommended a 
nip of brandy, and set me the example, and 
presently I felt better. I turned the manhole 
stopper back again. The throbbing in my ears 
grew louder, and then I remarked that the 
piping note of the outrush had ceased. For a 
time I could not be sure that it had ceased 

1' Zl \ I '""'" ''' "  S""' f  voice. 
Well.?" said I. 

" Shall we go on ? " 

I thought. " Is this all .? " 

"If you can stand it." 

By way of answer I went on unscrewing I 
ifted the circular operculum from its place and 
laid ,t carefully on the bale. A flake or so of 
snow whirled and vanished as that thin and 
unfamiliar air took possession of our sphere I 
knelt, and then seated myself at the edge of the 



96 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

manhole, peering over it. Beneath, within a 
yard of my face, lay the untrodden snow of the 
moon. 

There came a little pause. Our eyes met. 

" It doesn't distress your lungs too much ? " 
said Cavor. 
' No," I said. " I can stand this." 

He stretched out his hand for his blanket, 
thrust his head through its central hole and 
wrapped it about him. He sat down on the 
edge of the manhole, he let his feet drop until 
they were within six inches of the lunar ground. 
He hesitated for a moment, then thrust himself 
forward, dropped these intervening inches, and 
stood upon the untrodden soil of the moon. 

As he stepped forward he was refracted 
grotesquely by the edge of the glass. He 
stood for a moment looking this way and that. 
Then he drew himself together and leapt. 

The glass distorted ever'thing, but it seemed 
to me even then to be an extremely big leap. 
He had at one bound become remote. He 
seemed twenty or thirty feet off. He was 
standing high upon a rocky mass and gesticulating back to me. Perhaps he was shouting 
 but the sound did not reach me. But how 
the deuce had he done this ? I felt like a man 
who has just seen a new conjuring trick. 



PROSPECTING BEGINS 97 

In a puzzled state of mind I too dropped 
through the manhole. I stood up. Just in 
front of me the snowdrift had fallen away and 
made a sort of ditch, I made a step and 
jumped. 

I found myself flying through the air, saw 
the rock on which he stood coming to meet 
me, clutched it and clung in a state of infinite 
amazement. 

I gasped a painful laugh. I was tremendously confused. Cavor bent down and shouted 
in piping tones for me to be careful. 

I had forgotten that on the moon, with only 
an eighth part of the earth's mass and a quarter 
of its diameter, my weight was barely a sixth 
what it was on earth. But now that fact insisted on being remembered. 

"We are out of Mother Earth's leadingstrings now," he said. 

With a guarded effort I raised myself to the 
top, and moving as cautiously as a rheumatic 
patient, stood up beside him under the blaze 
of the sun. The sphere lay behind us on its 
dwindling snowdrift thirty feet away. 

As far as the eye could see over the enormous disorder of rocks that formed the crater 
floor, the same bristling scrub that surrounded 
us was starting into life, diversified here and 



98 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

there by bulging masses of a cactus form, and 
scarlet and purple lichens that grew so fast they 
seemed to crawl over the rocks. The whole 
area of the crater seemed to me then to be one 
similar wilderness up to the very foot of the 
surrounding cliff. 

This cliff was apparently bare of vegetation 
save at its base, and with buttresses and terraces and platforms that did not very greatly 
attract our attention at the time. It was many 
miles away from us in every direction, we 
seemed to be almost at the centre of the crater, 
and we saw it through a certain haziness that 
drove before the wind. For there was even a 
wind now in the thin air, a swift yet weak wind 
that chilled exceedingly but exerted little pressure. It was blowing round the crater, as it 
seemed, to the hot illuminated side from the 
foggy darkness under the sunward wall. It 
was difficult to look into this eastward fog ; we 
had to peer with half-closed eyes beneath the 
shade of our hands, because of the fierce intensity of the motionless sun. 
' It seems to be deserted," said Cavor, "absolutely desolate." 

I looked about me again. I retained even 
then a clinging hope of some quasi-human evidence, some pinnacle of building, some house 



PROSPECTING BEGINS 99 

or engine, but everywhere one looked spread 
the tumbled rocks in peaks and crests, and the 
darting scrub and those bulging cacti that 
swelled and swelled, a flat negation as it 
seemed of all such hope. 

"It looks as though these plants had it to 
themselves," I said. " I see no trace of anyother creature." 
 No insects  no birds  no ! Not a trace, 
not a scrap nor particle of animal life. If there 
was  what would they do in the night . . . . 
No ; there's just these plants alone." 

I shaded my eyes with my hand. " It's like 
the landscape of a dream. These things are 
less like earthly land plants than the things 
one imagines among the rocks at the bottom 
of the sea. Look at that yonder ! One might 
imagine it a lizard changed into a plant. And 
the glare ! " 

"This is only the fresh morning," said 
Cavor. 

He sighed and looked about him. " This is 
no world for men," he said. "And yet in a 
way  it appeals." 

He became silent for a time, then commenced 
his meditative humming. 

I started at a gentle touch, and found a thin 
sheet of livid lichen lapping over my shoe. I 



loo THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

kicked at it and it fell to powder, and each 
speck began to grow. 

I heard Cavor exclaim sharply, and perceived that one of the fixed bayonets of the 
scrub had pricked him. 

He hesitated, his eyes sought among the 
rocks about us. A sudden blaze of pink had 
crept up a ragged pillar of crag. It was a most 
extraordinary pink, a livid magenta. 

" Look ! " said I, turning, and behold Cavor 
had vanished ! 

For an instant I stood transfixed. Then I 
made a hasty step to look over the verge of 
the rock. But in my surprise at his disappearance I forgot once more that we were on 
the moon. The thrust of my foot that I made 
in striding would have carried me a yard on 
earth ; on the moon it carried me six  a good 
five yards over the edge. For the moment 
the thing had something of the effect of those 
nightmares when one falls and falls. For while 
one falls sixteen feet in the first second of a fall 
on earth, on the moon one falls two, and with 
only a sixth of one's weight. I fell, or rather 
I jumped down, about ten yards I suppose. It 
seemed to take quite a long time, five or six 
seconds, I should think. I floated through the 
air and fell like a feather, knee-deep in a snow



" I realised my leap had been too violent ' 



PROSPECTING BEGINS loi 

drift in the bottom of a gully of blue-grey, 
white-veined rock. < 

I looked about me. " Cavor ! " I cried ; but 
no Cavor was visible. 

" Cavor ! " I cried louder, and the rocks 
echoed me, 

I turned fiercely to the rocks and clambered 
to the summit of them.' Cavor ! " I cried. 
My voice sounded like the voice of a lost lamb. 

The sphere, too, was not in sight, and for a 
moment a horrible feeling of desolation pinched 
my heart. 

Then I saw him. He was laughing and 
gesticulating to attract my attention. He was 
on a bare patch of rock twenty or thirty yards 
away. I could not hear his voice, but "jump" 
said his gestures. I hesitated, the distance 
seemed enormous. Yet I reflected that surely 
I must be able to clear a greater distance than 
Cavor. 

I made a step back, gathered myself together, and leapt with all my might. I seemed 
to shoot right up in the air as though I should 
never come down. . . . 

It was horrible and delightful, and as wild 
as a nightmare, to go flying off in this fashion. 
I realised my leap had been altogether too 
violent. I flew clean over Cavor's head and 



102 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

beheld a spiky confusion in a gully spreading 
to meet my fall. I gave a yelp of alarm. I 
put out my hands and straightened my legs. 

I hit a huge fungoid bulk that burst all about 
me, scattering a mass of orange spores in every 
direction, and covering me with orange powder. 
I rolled over spluttering, and came to rest convulsed with breathless laughter. 

I became aware of Cavor's little round face 
peering over a bristling hedge. He shouted 
some faded inquiry. " Eh ? " I tried to shout, 
but could not do so for want of breath. He 
made his way towards me, coming gingerly 
among the bushes. 

" We've got to be careful," he said. " This 
moon has no discipline. She'll let us smash 
ourselves." 

He helped me to my feet. "You exerted 
yourself too much," he said, dabbing at the 
yellow stuff with his hand to remove it from 
my garments. 

I stood passive and panting, allowing him to 
beat off the jelly from my knees and elbows 
and lecture me upon my misfortunes. "We 
don't quite allow for the gravitation. Our 
muscles are scarcely educated yet. We must 
practise a little, when you have got your 
breath." 



PROSPECTING BEGINS 103 

I pulled two or three little thorns out of my 
hand, and sat for a time on a boulder of rock. 
My muscles were quivering, and I had that 
feeling of personal disillusionment that comes 
at the first fall to the learner of cycling on 
earth. 

It suddenly occurred to Cavor that the cold 
air in the gully, after the brightness of the sun, 
might give me a fever. So we clambered back 
into the sunlight. We found that beyond a 
few abrasions I had received no serious injuries 
from my tumble, and at Cavor's suggestion we 
were presently looking round for some safe 
and easy landing-place for my next leap. We 
chose a rocky slab some ten yards off, separated from us by a little thicket of olive-green 
spikes. 

"Imagine it there!" said Cavor, who was 
assuming the airs of a trainer, and he pointed 
to a spot about four feet from my toes. This 
leap I managed without difficulty, and I must 
confess I found a certain satisfaction in Cavor's 
falling short by a foot or so and tasting the 
spikes of the scrub. " One has to be careful, 
you see," he said, pulling out his thorns, and 
with that he ceased to be my Mentor, and 
became my fellow learner in the art of lunar 
locomotion. 



104 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

We chose a still easier jump and did it 
without difficulty, and then leapt back again, 
and to and fro several times, accustoming our 
muscles to the new standard. I could never 
have believed had I not experienced it, how 
rapid that adaptation would be. In a verylittle time indeed, certainly after fewer than 
thirty leaps, we could judge the effort necessary for a distance with almost terrestrial 
assurance. 

And all this time the lunar plants were 
growing around us, higher and denser and 
more entangled, every moment thicker and 
taller, spiked plants, green cactus masses, 
fungi, fleshy and lichenous things, strangest 
radiate and sinuous shapes. But we were so 
intent upon our leaping, that for a time we 
gave no heed to their unfaltering expansion. 

An extraordinary elation had taken possession of us. Partly, I think, it was our 
sense of release from the confinement of the 
sphere. Mainly, however, the thin sweetness 
of the air, which I am certain contained a 
much larger proportion of oxygen than our 
terrestrial atmosphere. In spite of the strange 
quality of all about us, I felt as adventurous 
and experimental as a cockney would do placed 
for the first time among mountains ; and I do 



PROSPECTING BEGINS 105 

not think it occurred to either of us, face to 
face though we were with the Unknown, to be 
very greatly afraid. 

We were bitten by a spirit of enterprise. 
We selected a lichenous kopje perhaps fifteen 
yards away, and landed neatly on its summit 
one after the other. " Good ! " we cried to 
each other; "good!" and Cavor made three 
steps and went off to a tempting slope of snow 
a good twenty yards and more beyond. I 
stood for a moment struck by the grotesque 
effect of his soaring figure  his dirty cricket 
cap, and spiky hair, his little round body, his 
arms and his knickerbockered legs tucked up 
tightly  against the weird spaciousness of the 
lunar scene. A gust of laughter seized me, 
and then I stepped off to follow. Plump ! I 
dropped beside him. 

We made a few gargantuan strides, leapt 
three or four times more, and sat down at last 
in a lichenous hollow. Our lungs were painful. 
We sat holding our sides and recovering our 
breath, looking appreciation at one another. 
Cavor panted something about "amazing sensations." And then came a thought into my 
head. For the moment it did not seem a particularly appalling thought, simply a natural 
question arising out of the situation. 



io6 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

 By the way," I said, " where exactly is the 
sphere ? " 

Cavor looked at me. " Eh ? " 

The full meaning of what we were saying 
struck me sharply. 

" Cavor ! " I cried, laying a hand on his arm, 
" where is the sphere ? " 



X 

LOST MEN IN THE MOON 

His face caught something of my dismay. 
He stood up and stared about him at the 
scrub that fenced us in and rose about us, 
straining upward in a passion of growth. He 
put a dubious hand to his lips. He spoke 
with a sudden lack of assurance. " I think," 
he said slowly, "we left it . . . somewhere 
. . . about there!' 

He pointed a hesitating finger that wavered 
in an arc. 

 I'm not sure." His look of consternation 
deepened. Anyhow," he said, with his eyes 
on me, " it can't be far." 

We had both stood up. We made unmeaning ejaculations, our eyes sought in the twining, 
thickening jungle round about us. 

All about us on the sunlit slopes frothed and 
swayed the darting shrubs, the swelling cactus, 
the creeping lichens, and wherever the shade 
remained the snowdrifts lingered. North, 



io8 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

south, east, and west spread an identical 
monotony of unfamiliar forms. And somewhere, buried already among this tangled 
confusion, was our sphere, our home, our 
only provision, our only hope of escape from 
this fantastic wilderness of ephemeral growths 
into which we had come. 

" I think, after all," he said, pointing suddenly, " it might be over there." 
 No," I said. " We have turned in a curve. 
See! here is the mark of my heels. It's clear 
the thing must be more to the eastward, much 
more. No !  the sphere must be over there." 

" I think,'' said Cavor, " I kept the sun upon 
my right all the time." 

"Every leap, it seems to me,'' I said, "my 
shadow flew before me." 

We stared into one another's eyes. The 
area of the crater had become enormously vast 
to our imaginations, the growing thickets 
already impenetrably dense. 

"Good heavens! What fools we have 
been ! " 

" It's evident that we must find it again," 
said Cavor, "and that soon. The sun grows 
stronger. We should be fainting with the 
heat already if it wasn't so dry. And . . . 
I'm hungry." 



LOST MEN IN THE MOON 109 

I stared at him. I had not suspected this 
aspect of the matter before. But it came to 
me at once  a positive craving. " Yes," I 
said with emphasis. " I am hungry too." 

He stood up with a look of active resolution. 
"Certainly we must find the sphere." 

As calmly as possible we surveyed the interminable reefs and thickets that formed the 
floor of the crater, each of us weighing in 
silence the chances of our finding the sphere 
before we were overtaken by heat and hunger. 

" It can't be fifty yards from here," said 
Cavor, with indecisive gestures. " The only 
thing is to beat round about until we come 
upon it." 
 That is all we can do," I said, without any 
alacrity to begin our hunt. " I wish this confounded spike bush did not grow so fast ! " 

" That's just it," said Cavor. " But it was 
lying on a bank of snow." 

I stared about me in the vain hope of recognising some knoll or shrub that had been near 
the sphere. But everywhere was a confusing 
sameness, everywhere the aspiring bushes, the 
distending fungi, the dwindling snow banks, 
steadily and inevitably changed. The sun 
scorched and stung, the faintness of an unaccountable hunger mingled with our infinite 



no THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

perplexity. And even as we stood there, confused and lost amidst unprecedented things, 
we became aware for the first time of a sound 
upon the moon other than the stir of the growing plants, the faint sighing of the wind, or 
those that we ourselves had made. 

Boom . . . Boom . . . Boom . . . 

It came from beneath our feet, a sound in 
the earth. We seemed to hear it with our feet 
as much as with our ears. Its dull resonance 
was muffled by distance, thick with the quality 
of intervening substance. No sound that I 
can imagine could have astonished us more, 
or have changed more completely the quality 
of things about us. For this sound, rich, slow, 
and deliberate, seemed to us as though it could 
be nothing but the striking of some gigantic 
buried clock. 

Boom . . . Boom . . . Boom . . . 

Sound suggestive of still cloisters, of sleepless nights in crowded cities, of vigils and 
the awaited hour, of all that is orderly and 
methodical in life, booming out pregnant and 
mysterious in this fantastic desert ! To the 
eye everything was unchanged : the desolation 
of bushes and cacti waving silently in the wind, 
stretched unbroken to the distant cliffs, the 
still dark sky was empty overhead, and the hot 



LOST MEN IN THE MOON m 

sun hung and burned. And through it all, 
a warning, a threat, throbbed this enigma of 
sound. 

Boom . . . Boom . . . Boom . . . 

We questioned one another in faint and 
faded voices. "A clock?" 

" Like a clock ! " 

" What is it ? " 

" What can it be ? " 

" Count," was Cavor's belated suggestion, 
and at that word the striking ceased. 

The silence, the rhythmic disappointment 
of the silence, came as a fresh shock. For a 
moment one could doubt whether one had ever 
heard a sound. Or whether it might not still 
be going on. Had I indeed heard a sound ? 

I felt the pressure of Cavor's hand upon my 
arm. He spoke in an undertone, as though 
he feared to wake some sleeping thing. " Let 
us keep together," he whispered, "and look 
for the sphere. We must get back to the 
sphere. This is beyond our understanding." 

" Which way shall we go ? " 

He hesitated. An intense persuasion of 
presences, of unseen things about us and near 
us, dominated our minds. What could they 
be? Where could they be? Was this arid 
desolation, alternately frozen and scorched, 



112 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

cnly the outer rind and mask of some subterranean world ? And if so, what sort of 
world ? What sort of inhabitants might it not 
presently disgorge upon us ? 

And then, stabbing the aching stillness as 
vivid and sudden as an unexpected thunderclap, came a clang and rattle as though great 
gates of metal had suddenly been flung apart. 

It arrested our steps. We stood gaping 
helplessly. Then Cavor stole towards me. 

" I do not understand !" he whispered close 
to my face. He waved his hand vaguely skyward, the vague suggestion of still vaguer 
thoughts. 
 "A hiding-place! If anything came ..." 

I looked about us. I nodded my head in 
assent to him. 

We started off, moving stealthily with the 
most exaggerated precautions against noise. 
We went towards a thicket of scrub. A 
clangour like hammers flung about a boiler 
hastened our steps. "We must crawl," 
whispered Cavor. 

The lower leaves of the bayonet plants, 
already overshadowed by the newer ones 
sbove, were beginning to wilt and shrivel so 
that we could thrust our way in among the 
thickening stems without serious injury. A 



LOST MEN IN THE MOON 113 

stab in the face or arm we did not heed. At 
the heart of the thicket I stopped, and stared 
panting into Cavor's face. 

" Subterranean," he whispered. " Below." 

" They may come out." 

" We must find the sphere ! " 

"Yes," I said; "but how?" 

" Crawl till we come to it." 

"But if we don't.?" 

" Keep hidden. See what they are like." 

"We will keep together," said I. 

He thought. " Which way shall we go ? " 

"We must take our chance." 

We peered this way and that. Then very 
circumspectly, we began to crawl through the 
lower jungle, making, so far as we could judge, 
a circuit, halting now at every waving fungus, 
at every sound, intent only on the sphere from 
which we had so foolishly emerged. Ever and 
again from out of the earth beneath us came 
concussions, beatings, strange, inexplicable, mechanical sounds ; and once, and then again, 
we thought we heard something, a faint rattle 
and tumult, borne to us through the air. But 
fearful as we were we dared essay no vantagepoint to survey the crater. For long we saw 
nothing of the beings whose sounds were so 
abundant and insistent. But for the faintness 
of our hunger and the drying of our throats 

H 



114 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

that crawling would have had the quality of a 
very vivid dream. It was so absolutely unreal. 
The only element with any touch of reality 
was these sounds. 

Figure it to yourself! About us the dreamlike jungle, with the silent bayonet leaves 
darting overhead, and the silent, vivid, sunsplashed lichens under our hands and knees, 
waving with the vigour of their growth as a 
carpet waves when the wind gets beneath it. 
Ever and again one of the bladder fungi, bulging and distending under the sun, loomed upon 
us. Ever and again some novel shape in vivid 
colour obtruded. The very cells that built up 
these plants were as large as my thumb, like 
beads of coloured glass. And all these things 
were saturated in the unmitigated glare of the 
sun, were seen against a sky that was bluish black 
and spangled still, in spite of the sunlight, with 
a few surviving stars. Strange ! the very forms 
and texture of the stones were strange. It was 
all strange, the feeling of one's body was unprecedented, every other movement ended in 
a surprise. The breath sucked thin in one's 
throat, the blood flowed through one's ears in a 
throbbing tide  thud, thud, thud, thud. . . . 

And ever and again came gusts of turmoil, 
hammering, the clanging and throb of machinery, 
and presently  the bellowing of great beasts ! 



XI 

THE MOONCALF PASTURES 



So we two poor terrestrial castaways, lost in 
that wild-growing moon jungle, crawled in 
terror before the sounds that had come upon 
us. We crawled, as it seemed, a long time 
before we saw either Selenite or mooncalf, 
though we heard the bellowing and gruntulous 
noises of these latter continually drawing nearer 
to us. We crawled through stony ravines, over 
snow slopes, amidst fungi that ripped like thin 
bladders at our thrust, emitting a watery humour, 
over a perfect pavement of things like puffballs, and beneath interminable thickets of scrub. 
And ever more hopelessly our eyes sought for 
our abandoned sphere. The noise of the mooncalves would at times be a vast flat calf-like 
sound, at times it rose to an amazed and 
wrathy bellowing, and again it would become 
a clogged bestial sound, as though these unseen creatures had sought to eat and bellow at 
the same time. 



s 



ii6 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

Our first view was but an inadequate transitory glimpse, yet none the less disturbing 
because it was incomplete. Cavor was crawling in front at the time, and he first was aware 
of their proximity. He stopped dead, arresting 
me with a single gesture. 

A crackling and smashing of the scrub appeared to be advancing directly upon us, and 
then, as we squatted close and endeavoured to 
judge of the nearness and direction of this 
noise, there came a terrific bellow behind us, 
so close and vehement that the tops of the 
bayonet scrub bent before it, and one felt the 
breath of it hot and moist. And, turning 
about, we saw indistinctly through a crowd of 
swaying stems the mooncalf s shining sides, and 
the long line of its back loomed out against 
the sky. 

Of course it is hard for me now to say how 
much I saw at that time, because my impressions were corrected by subsequent observation. 
First of all impressions was its enormous size ; 
the girth of its body was some fourscore feet, its 
length perhaps two hundred. Its sides rose 
and fell with its laboured breathing. I perceived that its gigantic, flabby body lay along 
the ground, and that its skin was of a corrugated white, dappling into blackness along 



THE MOONCALF PASTURES 117 

the backbone. But of its feet we saw nothing. 
I think also that we saw then the profile at 
least of the almost brainless head, with its fatencumbered neck, its slobbering omnivorous 
mouth, its little nostrils, and tight shut eyes. 
(For the mooncalf invariably shuts its eyes in 
the presence of the sun.) We had a glimpse 
of a vast red pit as it opened its mouth to bleat 
and bellow again ; we had a breath from the pit, 
and then the monster heeled over like a ship, 
dragged forward along the ground, creasing all 
its leathery skin, rolled again, and so wallowed 
past us, smashing a path amidst the scrub, and 
was speedily hidden from our eyes by the dense 
interlacings beyond. Another appeared more 
distantly, and then another, and then, as 
though he was guiding these animated lumps 
of provender to their pasture, a Selenite came 
momentarily into ken. My grip upon Cavor's 
foot became convulsive at the sight of him, and 
we remained motionless and peering long after 
he had passed out of our range. 

By contrast with the mooncalves he seemed 
a trivial being, a mere ant, scarcely five feet 
high. He was wearing garments of some 
leathery substance, so that no portion of his 
actual body appeared, but of this, of course, we 
were entirely ignorant. He presented himself, 



iiS THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

therefore, as a compact, bristling creature, having much of the quality of a complicated insect, 
with whip-like tentacles and a clanging arm 
projecting from his shining cylindrical body 
case. The form of his head was hidden by 
his enormous many-spiked helmet  we discovered afterwards that he used the spikes for 
prodding refractory mooncalves  and a pair of 
goggles of darkened glass, set very much at 
the side, gave a bird-like quality to the metallic 
apparatus that covered his face. His arms 
did not project beyond his body case, and he 
carried himself upon short legs that, wrapped 
though they were in warm coverings, seemed 
to our terrestrial eyes inordinately flimsy. 
They had very short thighs, very long shanks, 
and little feet. 

In spite of his heavy-looking clothing, he 
was progressing with what would be, from the 
terrestrial point of view, very considerable 
strides, and his clanging arm was busy. The 
quality of his motion during the instant of his 
passing suggested haste and a certain anger, 
and soon after we had lost sight of him we 
heard the bellow of a mooncalf change abruptly 
into a short, sharp squeal, followed by the 
scuffle of its acceleration. And gradually 
that bellowing receded, and then came to 



THE MOONCALF PASTURES 119 

an end, as if the pastures sought had been 
attained. 

We listened. For a space the moon world 
was still. But it was some time before we 
resumed our crawling search for the vanished 
sphere. 

When next we saw mooncalves they were 
some little distance away from us in a place of 
tumbled rocks. The less vertical surfaces of 
the rocks were thick with a speckled green 
plant growing in dense mossy clumps, upon 
which these creatures were browsing. We 
stopped at the edge of the reeds amidst which 
we were crawling at the sight of them, peering 
out at them and looking round for a second 
glimpse of a Selenite. They lay against their 
food like stupendous slugs, huge, greasy hulls, 
eating greedily and noisily, with a sort of sobbing avidity. They seemed monsters of mere 
fatness, clumsy and overwhelmed to a degree 
that would make a Smithfield ox seem a 
model of agility. Their busy, writhing, chewing mouths, and eyes closed, together with the 
appetising sound of their munching, made up 
an effect of animal enjoyment that was singularly stimulating to our empty frames. 

" Hogs ! " said Cavor with unusual passion. ' Disgusting hogs ! " and after one glare of 



I20 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

angry envy crawled off through the bushes 
to our right. I stayed long enough to see 
that the speckled plant was quite hopeless 
for human nourishment, then crawled after 
him, nibbling a quill of it between my teeth. 

Presently we were arrested again by the 
proximity of a Selenite, and this time we were 
able to observe him more exactly. Now we 
could see that the Selenite covering was indeed 
clothing, and not a sort of crustacean integument. He was quite similar in his costume to 
the former one we had glimpsed, except that 
ends of something like wadding were protruding from his neck, and he stood on a promontory of rock and moved his head this way and 
that, as though he was surveying the crater. 
We lay quite still, fearing to attract his attention if we moved, and after a time he turned 
about and disappeared. 

We came upon another drove of mooncalves 
bellowing up a ravine, and then we passed over 
a place of sounds, sounds of beating machinery, 
as if some huge hall of industry came near the 
surface there. And while these sounds were 
still about us we came to the edge of a great 
open space, perhaps two hundred yards in 
diameter, and perfectly level. Save for a few 
lichens that advanced from its margin this space 



THE MOONCALF PASTURES 121 

was bare, and presented a powdery surface 
of a dusty yellow colour. We were afraid to 
strike out across this space, but as it presented 
less obstruction to our crawling than the 
scrub, we went down upon it and began very 
circumspectly to skirt its edge. 

For a little while the noises from below 
ceased, and everything, save for the faint stir 
of the growing vegetation, was very still. 
Then abruptly there began an uproar, louder, 
more vehement, and nearer than any we had 
so far heard. Of a certainty it came from 
below. Instinctively we crouched as flat as 
we could, ready for a prompt plunge into the 
thicket beside us. Each knock and throb 
seemed to vibrate through our bodies. Louder 
grew this throbbing and beating, and that 
irregular vibration increased until the whole 
moon world seemed to be jerking and pulsing. 
 Cover," whispered Cavor, and I turned 
towards the bushes. 

At that instant came a thud like the thud 
of a gun, and then a thing happened  it still 
haunts me in my dreams. I had turned my 
head to look at Cavor's face, and thrust out 
my hand in front of me as I did so. And my 
hand met nothing ! Plunged suddenly into a 
bottomless hole ! 



122 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

My chest hit something hard, and I found 
myself with my chin on the edge of an unfathomable abyss that had suddenly opened 
beneath me, my hand extended stiffly into the 
void. The whole of that flat circular area was 
no more than a gigantic lid, that was now 
sliding sideways from off the pit it had covered 
into a slot prepared for it. 

Had it not been for Cavor I think I should 
have remained rigid, hanging over this margin 
and staring into the enormous gulf below, 
until at last the edges of the slot scraped me 
off and hurled me into its depths. But Cavor 
had not received the shock that had paralysed 
me. He had been a little distance from the 
edge when the lid had first opened, and perceiving the peril that held me helpless, gripped 
my legs and pulled me backward. I came into 
a sitting position, crawled away from the edge 
for a space on all fours, then staggered up and 
ran after him across the thundering, quivering 
sheet of metal. It seemed to be swinging 
open with a steadily accelerated velocity, and 
the bushes in front of me shifted sideways as 
I ran. 

I was none too soon. Cavor's back vanished 
amidst the bristling thicket, and as I scrambled 
up after him, the monstrous valve came into 



THE MOONCALF PASTURES 123 

its position with a clang. For a long time we 
lay panting, not daring to approach the pit. 

But at last very cautiously and bit by bit we 
crept into a position from which we could peer 
down. The bushes about us creaked and 
waved with the force of a breeze that was 
blowing dovn the shaft. We could see nothing 
at first except smooth vertical walls descending 
at last into an inpenetrable black. And then 
very gradually we became aware of a number 
of very faint and little lights going to and fro. 

For a time that stupendous gulf of mystery 
held us so that we forgot even our sphere. In 
time, as we grew more accustomed to the darkness, we could make out very small, dim, 
elusive shapes moving about among those 
needle-point illuminations. We peered amazed 
and incredulous, understanding so little that 
we could find no words to say. We could 
distinguish nothing that would give us a clue 
to the meaning of the faint shapes we saw. 

"What can it be?" I asked;'what can 
it be?" 
 The engineering ! . . . They must live in 
these caverns during the night, and come out 
during the day." 

"Cavor!" I said. "Can they be  M  it 
was something like  men ? " 



124 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" Tia was not a man." 

" We dare risk nothing ! " 
' We dare do nothing until we find the 
sphere ! " 

" We can do nothing until we find the 
sphere." 

He assented with a groan and stirred himself 
to move. He stared about him for a space, 
sighed, and indicated a direction. We struck 
out through the jungle. For a time we crawled 
resolutely, then with diminishing vigour. Presently among great shapes of flabby purple 
there came a noise of trampling and cries 
about us. We lay close, and for a long time 
the sounds went to and fro and very near. 
But this time we saw nothing. I tried to 
whisper to Cavor that I could hardly go without food much longer, but my mouth had 
become too dry for whispering. 

" Cavor," I said, " I must have food." 

He turned a face full of dismay towards me. 
" It's a case for holding out," he said. 

" But I imist'' I said, " and look at my lips ! " 

" I've been thirsty some time." 

" If only some of that snow had remained ! " 

" It's clean gone ! We're driving from 
arctic to tropical at the rate of a degree a 
minute . . ." 



THE MOONCALF PASTURES 125 

I gnawed my hand. 

" The sphere ! " he said. " There is nothing 
for it but the sphere." 

We roused ourselves to another spurt of 
crawHng. My mind ran entirely on edible 
things, on the hissing profundity of summer 
drinks, more particularly I craved for beer. 
I was haunted by the memory of a sixteen 
gallon cask that had swaggered in my Lympne 
cellar. I thought of the adjacent larder, and 
especially of steak and kidney pie  tender 
steak and plenty of kidney, and rich, thick 
gravy between. Ever and again I was seized 
with fits of hungry yawning. We came to 
flat places overgrown with fleshy red things, 
monstrous coralline growths ; as we pushed 
against them they snapped and broke. I 
noted the quality of the broken surfaces. The 
confounded stuff certainly looked of a biteable 
texture. Then it seemed to me that it smelt 
rather well. 

I picked up a fragment and sniffed at it. 

" Cavor," I said in a hoarse undertone. 

He glanced at me with his face screwed up. 
"Don't," he said. I put down the fragment, 
and we crawled on through this tempting 
fleshiness for a space. 

"Cavor," I asked, "why nof" 



126 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 
' Poison," I heard him say, but he did not 
look round. 

We crawled some way before I decided. 

" I'll chance it," said I. 

He made a belated gesture to prevent me. 
I stuffed my mouth full. He crouched watching 
my face, his own twisted into tlT,e oddest expression. " It's good," I said. 

" O Lord ! " he cried. 

He watched me munch, his face wrinkled 
between desire and disapproval, then suddenly 
succumbed to appetite, and began to tear off 
huge mouthfuls. For a time we did nothing 
but eat. 

The stuff was not unlike a terrestrial mushroom, only it was much laxer in texture, and, as 
one swallowed it, it warmed the throat. At first 
we experienced a mere mechanical satisfaction 
in eating ; then our blood began to run warmer, 
and we tingled at the lips and fingers, and then 
new and slightly irrelevant ideas came bubbling 
up in our minds. 

" It's good," said I. " Infernally good ! 
What a home for our surplus population ! Our 
poor surplus population," and I broke off another large portion. 

It filled me with a curiously benevolent satisfaction that there was such good food in the 



THE MOONCALF PASTURES 127 

moon. The depression of my hunger gave 
way to an irrational exhilaration. The dread 
and discomfort in which I had been living 
vanished entirely. I perceived the moon no 
longer as a planet from which I most earnestly 
desired the means of escape, but as a possible 
refuge for human destitution. I think I forgot 
the Selenites, the mooncalves, the lid, and the 
noises completely so soon as I had eaten that 
fungus. 

Cavor replied to my third repetition of my  surplus population " remark with similar words 
of approval. I felt that my head swam, but I put 
this down to the stimulating effect of food after 
a long fast. " Ess'lent discov'ry yours, Cavor," 
said I. " Send on'y to the 'tato." 
' Whajer mean ? " asked Cavor. " 'Scovery 
of the moon  send on'y to the 'tato ? " 

I looked at him, shocked at his suddenly 
hoarse voice, and by the badness of his articulation. It occurred to me in a flash that he 
was intoxicated, possibly by the fungus. It 
also occurred to me that he erred in imagining 
that he had discovered the moon ; he had not 
discovered it, he had only reached it. I tried 
to lay my hand on his arm and explain this 
to him, but the issue was too subtle for his 
bram. It was also unexpectedly difficult to 



128 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

express. After a momentary attempt to understand me  I remember wondering if the 
fungus had made my eyes as fishy as his  he 
set off upon some observations on his own 
account. 

"We are," he announced with a solemn 
hiccup, "the creashurs o' what we eat and 
drink." 

He repeated this, and as I was now in one 
of my subtle moods, I determined to dispute it. 
Possibly I wandered a little from the point. 
But Cavor certainly did not attend at all properly. He stood up as well as he could, putting 
a hand on my head to steady himself, which was 
disrespectful, and stood staring about him, quite 
devoid now of any fear of the moon beings. 

I tried to point out that this was dangerous 
for some reason that was not perfectly clear to 
me, but the word "dangerous" had somehow 
got mixed with " indiscreet," and came out 
rather more like "injuriou' than either; and 
after an attempt to disentangle them, I resumed 
my argument, addressing myself principally to 
the unfamiliar but attentive coralline growths 
on either side. I felt that it was necessary to 
clear up this confusion between the moon and 
a potato at once  I wandered into a long parenthesis on the importance of precision of de


THE MOONCALF PASTURES 129 

finition in argument. I did my best to ignore 
the fact that my bodily sensations were no 
longer agreeable. 

- In some way that I have now forgotten, my 
mind was led back to projects of colonisation. 
"We must annex this moon," I said. "There 
must be no shilly-shally. This is part of the 
White Man's Burthen. Cavor  we are  Aic 
 Satap  mean Satraps! N empire Csesar 
never dreamt. B'in all the newspapers. Cavorecia. Bedfordecia. Bedfordecia  hie  
Limited. Mean  unlimited ! Practically." 

Certainly I was intoxicated. 

I embarked upon an argument to show the 
infinite benefits our arrival would confer on the 
moon. I involved myself in a rather difficult 
proof that the arrival of Columbus was, on the 
whole, beneficial to America. I found I had 
forgotten the line of argument I had intended 
to pursue, and continued to repeat " Simlar to 
C'lumbus," to fill up time. 

From that point my memory of the action of 
that abominable fungus becomes confused. I 
remember vaguely that we declared our intention of standing no nonsense from any confounded insects, that we decided it ill became 
men to hide shamefully upon a mere satellite, 
that we equipped ourselves with huge armfuls 

I 



I30 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

of the fungus  whether for missile purposes or 
not I do not know  and, heedless of the stabs 
of the bayonet scrub, we started forth into the 
sunshine. 

Almost immediately we must have come upon 
the Selenites. There were six of them, and 
they were marching in single file over a rocky 
place, making the most remarkable piping and 
whining sounds. They all seemed to become 
aware of us at once, all instantly became silent 
and motionless, like animals, with their faces 
turned towards us. 

For a moment I was sobered. 

" Insects," murmured Cavor, " insects ! And 
they think I'm going to crawl about on my 
stomach  on my vertebrated stomach ! 

" Stomach," he repeated slowly, as though 
he chewed the indignity. i' 

Then suddenly, with a shout of fury, he made 
three vast strides and leapt towards them. He 
leapt badly ; he made a series of somersaults in 
the air, whirled right over them, and vanished 
with an enormous splash amidst the cactus 
bladders. What the Selenites made of this 
amazing, and to my mind undignified irruption 
from another planet, I have no means of guessing. I seem to remember the sight of their 
backs as they ran in all directions, but I am 



if' ' 








Insects," murmured Cavor, "insects' 



THE MOONCALF PASTURES 131 

not sure. All these last incidents before oblivion came are vague and faint in my mind. I 
know I made a step to follow Cavor, and tripped 
and fell headlong among the rocks. I was, I 
am certain, suddenly and vehemently ill. I 
seem to remember a violent struggle, and being 
gripped by metallic clasps. . . . 

My next clear recollection is that we were 
prisoners at we knew not what depth beneath 
the moon's surface ; we were in darkness amidst 
strange distracting noises ; our bodies were 
covered with scratches and bruises, and our 
heads racked with pain. 



XII 

THE SELENITe's FACE 

I FOUND myself sitting crouched together in a 
tumultuous darkness. For a lonor time I could 
not understand where I was, nor how I had come 
to this perplexity. I thought of the cupboard 
into which I had been thrust at times when I 
was a child, and then of a very dark and noisy 
bedroom in which I had slept during an illness. 
But these sounds about me were not the noises 
I had known, and there was a thin flavour in 
the air like the wind of a stable. Then I supposed we must still be at work upon the sphere, 
and that somehow I had got into the cellar of 
Cavor's house. I remembered we had finished 
the sphere, and fancied I must still be in it 
and travelling through space. 

" Cavor," I said, " cannot we have some 
light ? " 

There came no answer. 

"Cavor!" I insisted. 

I was answered by a groan. " My head ! " 
I heard him say ; " my head ! " 



THE SELENITE'S FACE 133 

I attempted to press my hands to my brow, 
which ached, and discovered they were tied 
together. This startled me very much. I 
brought them up to my mouth and felt the 
cold smoothness of metal. They were chained 
together. I tried to separate my legs, and 
made out they were similarly fastened, and 
also that I was fastened to the ground by a 
much thicker chain about the middle of my 
body. 

I was more frightened than I had yet been 
by anything in all our strange experiences. 
For a time I tugged silently at my bonds. 
"Cavor!" I cried out sharply. "Why am I 
tied ? Why have you tied me hand and foot " 

" I haven't tied you," he answered. " It's 
the Selenites." 

The Selenites ! My mind hung on that for 
a space. Then my memories came back to 
me : the snowy desolation, the thawing of the 
air, the growth of the plants, our strange 
hopping and crawling among the rocks and 
vegetation of the crater. All the distress of 
our frantic search for the sphere returned to 
me. . . . Finally the opening of the great lid 
that covered the pit ! 

Then as I strained to trace our later movements down to our present plight, the pain in 



134 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

my head became intolerable. I came to an 
insurmountable barrier, an obstinate blank. 

" Cavor ! " 

"Yes?" 

" Where are we ? " 

" How should I know ? " 

"Are we dead?" 

" What nonsense ! " 

" They've got us, then ! " 

He made no answer but a grunt. The 
lingering traces of the poison seemed to make 
him oddly irritable. 

" What do you mean to do ? " 

" How should I know what to do ? " 

"Oh, very well!" said I, and became 
silent. Presently I was roused from a stupor. 
"O Lord!" I cried; "I wish you'd stop 
that buzzing ! " 

We lapsed into silence again, listening to 
the dull confusion of noises like the muffled 
sounds of a street or factory that filled our ears. 
I could make nothing of it, my mind pursued first one rhythm and then another, and 
questioned it in vain. But after a long time 
I became aware of a new and sharper element, 
not mingling with the rest but standing out, as 
it were, against that cloudy background of 
sound. It was a series of relatively very little 



THE SELENITE'S FACE 135 

definite sounds, tappings and rubbings, like 
a loose spray of ivy against a window or a 
bird moving about upon a box. We listened 
and peered about us, but the darkness was a 
velvet pall. There followed a noise like the 
subtle movement of the wards of a well-oiled 
lock. And then there appeared before me, 
hanging as it seemed in an immensity of black, 
a thin bright line. 

" Look ! " whispered Cavor very softly. 

"What is it?" 

" I don't know." 

We stared. 

The thin bright line became a band, and 
broader and paler. It took upon itself the 
quality of a bluish light falling upon a whitewashed wall. It ceased to be parallel-sided ; 
it developed a deep indentation on one side. 
I turned to remark this to Cavor, and was 
amazed to see his ear in a brilliant illumination 
 all the rest of him in shadow. I twisted 
my head round as well as my bonds would 
permit. " Cavor," I said, " it's behind ! " 

His ear vanished  gave place to an eye ! 

Suddenly the crack that had been admitting 
the light broadened out, and revealed itself as 
the space of an opening door. Beyond was 
a sapphire vista, and in the doorway stood 



136 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

a grotesque outline silhouetted against the 
glare. 

We both made convulsive efforts to turn, 
and failing, sat staring over our shoulders at 
this. My first impression was of some clumsyquadruped with lowered head. Then I perceived it was the slender pinched body and 
short and extremely attenuated bandy legs of 
a Selenite, with his head depressed between his 
shoulders. He was without the helmet and 
body covering they wear upon the exterior. 

He was a blank, black figure to us, but instinctively our imaginations supplied features 
to his very human outline. I, at least, took it 
instantly that he was somewhat hunchbacked, 
with a hic:h forehead and long- features. 

He came forward three steps and paused for 
a time. His movements seemed absolutely 
noiseless. Then he came forward again. He 
walked like a bird, his feet fell one in front of 
the other. He stepped out of the ray of light 
that came through the doorway, and it seemed 
as though he vanished altogether in the shadow. 

For a moment my eyes sought him in the 
wrong place, and then I perceived him standing 
facing us both in the full light. Only the 
human features I had attributed to him were 
not there at all ! 




" Tliete the ihing was, looking at us 



THE SELENITE'S FACE 137 

Of course I ought to have expected that, 
only I didn't. It came to me as an absolute, 
for a moment an overwhelming, shock. It 
seemed as though it wasn't a face, as though 
it must needs be a mask, a horror, a deformity, 
that would presently be disavowed or explained. 
There was no nose, and the thing had dull 
bulging eyes at the side  in the silhouette I 
had supposed they were ears. There were no 
ears. ... I have tried to draw one of these 
heads, but I cannot. There was a mouth, 
downwardly curved, like a human mouth in a 
face that stares ferociously. . . . 

The neck on which the head was poised was 
jointed in three places, almost like the short 
joints in the leg of a cab. The joints of the 
limbs I could not see, because of the putteelike straps in which they were swathed, and 
which formed the only clothing the being wore. 

There the thing was, looking at us ! 

At the time my mind was taken up by the 
mad impossibility of the creature. I suppose 
he also was amazed, and with more reason, 
perhaps, for amazement than we. Only, confound him ! he did not show it. We did at 
least know what had brought about this meeting of incompatible creatures. But conceive 
how it would seem to decent Londoners, for 



138 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

example, to come upon a couple of living 
things, as big as men and absolutely unlike 
any other earthly animals, careering about 
among the sheep in Hyde Park! It must 
have taken him like that. 

Figure us ! We were bound hand and foot, 
fagged and filthy ; our beards two inches long, 
our faces scratched and bloody. Cavor you 
must imagine in his knickerbockers (torn in 
several places by the bayonet scrub), his Jaeger 
shirt and old cricket cap, his wiry hair wildly 
disordered, a tail to every quarter of the 
heavens. In that blue light his face did not 
look red but very dark, his lips and the drying 
blood upon my hands seemed black. If possible I was in a worse plight than he, on 
account of the yellow fungus into which I had 
jumped. Our jackets were unbuttoned, and 
our shoes had been taken off and lay at our 
feet. And we were sitting with our backs to 
this queer bluish light, peering at such a 
monster as Durer might have invented. 

Cavor broke the silence ; started to speak", 
went hoarse, and cleared his throat. Outside 
began a terrific bellowing, as if a mooncalf 
were m trouble. It ended in a shriek, and 
everything was still again. 

Presently the Selenite turned about, flickered 



THE SELENITE'S FACE 139 

into the shadow, stood for a moment retrospective at the door, and then closed it 
on us ; and once more we were in that murmurous mystery of darkness into which we 
had awakened. 



XIII 

MR. CAVOR MAKES SOME SUGGESTIONS 

For a time neither of us spoke. To focus 
together all the things we had brought upon 
ourselves, seemed beyond my mental powers. 
 They've got us," I said at last. 

" It was that fundus." 
 Well  if I hadn't taken it we should have 
fainted and starved." 

" We might have found the sphere." 

I lost my temper at his persistence, and 
swore to myself. For a time we hated one 
another in silence. I drummed with my 
fingers on the floor between my knees, and 
gritted the links of my fetters together. Presently I was forced to talk again. 

" What do you make of it, anyhow ? " I asked 
humbly. 

" They are reasonable creatures  they can 
make things and do things  Those lights 
we saw . . ." 

He stopped. It was clear he could make 
nothing of it. 



MR. CAVOR MAKES SUGGESTIONS 141 

When he spoke again it was to confess, 
" After all, they are more human than we had 
a right to expect. I suppose " 

He stopped irritatingly. 

"Yes?" 

" I suppose, anyhow  on any planet where 
there is an intelligent animal  it will carry its 
brain case upward, and have hands, and walk 
erect ..." 

Presently he broke away in another direction. 

"We are some way in," he said. "I mean 
 perhaps a couple of thousand feet or more." 

"Why." 

" It's cooler. And our voices are so much 
louder. That faded quality  it has altogether 
gone. And the feeling in one's ears and 
throat." 

I had not noted that, but I did now. 

"The air is denser. We must be some 
depth  a mile even, we may be  inside the 
moon." 

"We never thought of a world inside the 
moon." 

"No." 

" How could we?" 

" We might have done. Only  One gets 
into habits of mind." 

He thought for a time. 



142 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" NoWy" he said, "it seems such an obvious 
thing. 

" Of course ! The moon must be enormously 
cavernous, with an atmosphere within, and at 
the centre of its caverns a sea. 

" One knew that the moon had a lower specific 
gravity than the earth, one knew that it had Httle 
air or water outside, one knew, too, that it was 
sister planet to the earth, and that it was unaccountable that it should be different in composition. The inference that it was hollowed 
out was as clear as day. And yet one never 
saw it as a fact. Kepler, of course " 

His voice had the interest now of a man who 
has discovered a pretty sequence of reasoning. 

" Yes," he said, " Kepler with his sub-volvani 
was right after all." 
' I wish you had taken the trouble to find 
that out before we came," I said. 

He answered nothing, buzzing to himself 
softly as he pursued his thoughts. My temper 
was going. "What do you think has become 
of the sphere, anyhow ? " I asked. 

" Lost," he said, like a man who answers an 
uninteresting question. 

" Among those plants ? " 

" Unless they find it." 

"And then.?" 



MR. CAVOR MAKES SUGGESTIONS 143 
" How can I tell ? " 

"Cavor," I said, with a sort of hysterical 
bitterness, "things look bright for my Company. . . ." 

He made no answer. 

" Good Lord ! " I exclaimed. " Just think of 
all the trouble we took to get into this pickle ! 
What did we come for ? What are we after ? 
What was the moon to us or we to the moon ? 
We wanted too much, we tried too much. We 
ought to have started the little things first. It 
was you proposed the moon ! Those Cavorite 
spring blinds! I am certain we could have 
worked them for terrestrial purposes. Certain ! 
Did you really understand what I proposed 

A steel cylinder " 

"Rubbish!" said Cavor. 
We ceased to converse. 

For a time Cavor kept up a broken monologue without much help from me. 

"If they find it," he began, "if they find it 
. . . what will they do with it ? Well, that's a 
question. It may be that's le question. They 
won't understand it, anyhow. If they understood that sort of thing they would have come 
long since to the earth. Would they ? Why 
shouldn't they? But they would have sent 
something They couldn't keep their hands 



144 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

off such a possibility. No ! But they will 
examine it. Clearly they are intelligent and 
inquisitive. They will examine it  get inside 
it  trifle with the studs. Off! . . . That 
would mean the moon for us for all the rest 
of our lives. Strange creatures, strange knowledge ..." 

" As for strange knowledge  " said I, and 
language failed me. 

"Look here, Bedford," said Cavor, "you 
came on this expedition of your own free will." 

" You said to me, ' Call it prospecting.' " 

" There's always risks in prospecting." 

" Especially when you do it unarmed and 
without thinking out every possibility." 

" I was so taken up with the sphere. The 
thing rushed on us, and carried us away." 

" Rushed on me, you mean." 

" Rushed on me just as much. How was  
to know when I set to work on molecular 
physics that the business would bring me here 
 of all places ? " 

" It's this accursed science," I cried. "It's the 
very Devil. The mediaeval priests and persecutors were right and the Moderns are all wrong. 
You tamper with it  and it offers you gifts. 
And directly you take them it knocks you to 
pieces in some unexpected way. Old passions 



MR. CAVOR MAKES SUGGESTIONS 145 

and new weapons  now it upsets your religion, 
now it upsets your social ideas, now it whirls 
you off to desolation and misery ! " 

" Anyhow, it's no use your quarrelling with 
me now. These creatures these Selenites, or 
whatever we choose to call them  have got us 
tied hand and foot. Whatever temper you 
choose to go through with it in, you will 
have to go through with it. . . . We have 
experiences before us that will need all our 
coolness." 

He paused as if he required my assent. But 
I sat sulking. "Confound your science!" I 
said. 

 The problem is communication. Gestures, 
I fear, will be different. Pointing, for example. 
No creatures but men and monkeys point." 

That was too obviously wrong for me. 
'Pretty nearly every animal," I cried, ''points 
with its eyes or nose." 

Cavor meditated over that. "Yes," he said 
at last, "and we don't. There's such differencessuch differences ! 

"One might ... But how can I tell.? 
There is speech. The sounds they make, a 
sort of fluting and piping. I don't see how we 
are to imitate that. Is it their speech, that 
sort of thing ? They may have different senses, 

K 



146 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

different means of communication. Of course 
they are minds and we are minds ; there must 
be something in common. Who knows how far 
we may not get to an understanding ? " 

" The things are outside us," I said.  They're more different from us than the 
strangest animals on earth. They are a different clay. What is the good of talking like 
this?" 

Cavor thought. " I don't see that. Where 
there are minds they will have something 
similar  even though they have been evolved 
on different planets. Of course if it was a 
question of instincts, if we or they are no more 
than animals " 

" Well, are they ? They're much more like 
ants on their hind legs than human beings, and 
who ever got to any sort of understanding with 
ants?" 

" But these machines and clothing! No, I 
don't hold with you, Bedford. The difference 
is wide " 

" It's insurmountable." 
' The resemblance must bridge it. I remember reading once a paper by the late 
Professor Galton on the possibility of communication between the planets. Unhappily, at 
that time it did not seem probable that that 



MR. CAVOR MAKES SUGGESTIONS 147 

would be of any material benefit to me, and I 
fear I did not give it the attention I should 
have done  in view of this state of affairs. 
Yet . . . Now, let me see ! 

" His idea was to begin with those broad 
truths that must underlie all conceivable mental 
existences and establish a basis on those. The 
great principles of geometry, to begin with. 
He proposed to take some leading proposition 
of Euclid's, and show by construction that its 
truth was known to us, to demonstrate, for 
example, that the angles at the base of an 
isosceles triangle are equal, and that if the 
equal sides be produced the angles on the 
other side of the base are equal also, or that 
the square on the hypotenuse of a right-angled 
triangle is equal to the sum of the squares on 
the two other sides. By demonstrating our 
knowledge of these things we should demonstrate our possession of a reasonable intelligence. . . . Now, suppose I ... I might draw 
the geometrical figure with a wet finger, or 
even trace it in the air . . ." 

He fell silent. I sat meditating his words. 
For a time his wild hope of communication, of 
interpretation, with these weird beings held me. 
Then that angry despair that was a part of my 
exhaustion and physical misery resumed its 



148 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

sway. I perceived with a sudden novel vividness the extraordinary folly of everything I had 
ever done. "Ass!" I said; "oh, ass, unutterable ass ... I seem to exist only to go about 
doing preposterous things. . . . Why did we 
ever leave the thing? . . . Hopping about 
looking for patents and concessions in the 
craters of the moon ! ... If only we had had 
the sense to fasten a handkerchief to a stick 
to show where we had left the sphere ! " 

I subsided, fuming. 

"It is clear," meditated Cavor, "they are 
intelligent. One can hypotheticate certain 
things. As they have not killed us at once, 
they must have ideas of mercy. Mercy! at 
any rate of restraint. Possibly of intercourse. 
They may meet us. And this apartment and 
the glimpses we had of its guardian. These 
fetters ! A high degree of intelligence . . ." 

" I wish to heaven," cried I, " I'd thought 
even twice ! Plunge after plunge. First one 
fluky start and then another. It was my confidence in you ! Wiy didn't I stick to my 
play.- That was what I was equal to. That 
was my world and the life I was made for. I 
could have finished that play. I'm certain . . . 
it was a good play. I had the scenario as good 
as done. Then . . . Conceive it ! leaping to 



MR. CAVOR MAKES SUGGESTIONS 149 

the moon! Practically  I've thrown my life 
away ! That old woman in the inn near Canterbury had better sense." 

I looked up, and stopped in mid-sentence. 
The darkness had given place to that bluish 
light again. The door was opening, and several noiseless Selenites were coming into the 
chamber. I became quite still, staring at their 
grotesque faces. 

Then suddenly my; sense of disagreeable 
strangeness changed to interest. I perceived 
that the foremost and second carried bowls. 
One elemental need at least our minds could 
understand in common. They were bowls of 
some metal that, like our fetters, looked dark 
in that bluish light; and each contained a 
number of whitish fragments. All the cloudy 
pain and misery that oppressed me rushed 
together and took the shape of hunger. I eyed 
these bowls wolfishly, and, though it returned 
to me in dreams, at that time it seemed a small 
matter that at the end of the arms that lowered 
one towards me were not hands, but a sort of 
flap and thumb, like the end of an elephant's 
trunk. 

The stuff in the bowl was loose in texture, 
and whitish brown in colour  rather like lumps 
of some cold souffle, and it smelt faindy like 



ISO THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

mushrooms. From a partially divided carcass 
of a mooncalf that we presently saw, I am inclined to believe it must have been mooncalf 
flesh. 

My hands were so tightly chained that I 
could barely contrive to reach the bowl ; but 
when they saw the effort I made, two of them 
dexterously released one of the turns about 
my wrist. Their tentacle hands were soft and 
cold to my skin. I immediately seized a 
mouthful of the food. It had the same laxness 
in texture that all organic structures seem to 
have upon the moon ; it tasted rather like a 
gauffre or a damp meringue, but in no way 
was it disagreeable. I took two other mouthfuls. "I wanted  foo' ! " said 'I, tearing off a 
still larger piece. . . . 

For a time we ate with an utter absence of 
self-consciousness. We ate and presently drank 
like tramps in a soup kitchen. Never before 
nor since have I been hungry to the ravenous 
pitch, and save that I have had this very experience I could never have believed that, a 
quarter of a million of miles out of our proper 
world, in utter perplexity of soul, surrounded, 
watched, touched by beings more grotesque 
and inhuman than the worst creations of a 
nightmare, it would be possible for me to eat 



MR. CAVOR MAKES SUGGESTIONS 151 

in utter forgetfulness of all these things. They 
stood about us watching us, and ever and again 
making a slight elusive twittering that stood 
them, I suppose, in the stead of speech. I did 
not even shiver at their touch. And when the 
first zeal of my feeding was over, I could note 
that Cavor, too, had been eating with the same 
shameless abandon. 



XIV 

EXPERIMENTS IN INTERCOURSE 

When at last we had made an end of eating, 
the Selenites Hnked our hands closely together 
again, and then untwisted the chains about our 
feet and rebound them, so as to give us a 
limited freedom of movement. Then they 
unfastened the chains about our waists. To 
do all this they had to handle us freely, and 
ever and again one of their queer heads came 
down close to my face, or a soft tentaclehand touched my head or neck. I don't remember that I was afraid then or repelled by 
their proximity. I think that our incurable 
anthropomorphism made us imagine there were 
human heads inside their masks. The skin, 
like everything else, looked bluish, but that 
was on account of the light ; and it was hard 
and shiny, quite in the beetle-wing fashion, 
not soft, or moist, or hairy, as a vertebrated 
animal's would be. Along the crest of the 
head was a low ridge of whitish spines run


EXPERIMENTS IN INTERCOURSE 153 

ning from back to front, and a much larger 

ridge curved on either side over the eyes. 

The Selenite who untied me used his mouth 

to help his hands. 

" They seem to be releasing us," said Cavor. 
' Remember we are on the moon ! Make no 

sudden movements ! " 

" Are you going to try that geometry ? " 
 If I get a chance. But, of course, they 

may make an advance first." 

We remained passive, and the Selenites, 
havmg finished their arrangements, stood back 
from us, and seemed to be looking at us. I 
say seemed to be, because as their eyes were 
at the side and not in front, one had the same 
difficulty in determining the direction in which 
they were looking as one has in the case of a 
hen or a fish. They conversed with one another in their reedy tones, that seemed to me 
impossible to imitate or define. The door 
behind us opened wider, and, glancing over 
my shoulder, I saw a vague large space beyond, in which quite a little crowd of Selenites were standing. They seemed a curiously 
miscellaneous rabble. 

" Do they want us to imitate those sounds ? " 
I asked Cavor. 

" I don't think so," he said. 



154 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

"It seems to me that they are trying to 
make us understand something." 

" I can't make anything of their gestures. 
Do you notice this one, who is worrying with 
his head like a man with an uncomfortable 
collar ? " 

" Let us shake our heads at him." 

We did that, and finding it ineffectual, attempted an imitation of the Selenites' movements. That seemed to interest them. At 
any rate they all set up the same movement. 
But as that seemed to lead to nothing, we 
desisted at last and so did they, and fell into a 
piping argument among themselves. Then one 
of them, shorter and very much thicker than 
the others, and with a particularly wide mouth, 
squatted down suddenly beside Cavor, and put 
his hands and feet in the same posture as 
Cavor's were bound, and then by a dexterous 
movement stood up. 

" Cavor," I shouted, " they want us to 
get up ! " 

He stared open-mouthed. "That's it!" 
he said. 

And with much heaving and grunting, because our hands were tied together, we contrived 
to struggle to our feet. The Selenites made 
way for our elephantine heavings, and seemed 



EXPERIMENTS IN INTERCOURSE 155 

to twitter more volubly. As soon as we were 
on our feet the thick-set Selenite came and 
patted each of our faces with his tentacles, 
and walked towards the open doorway. That 
also was plain enough, and we followed him. 
We saw that four of the Selenites standing in 
the doorway were much taller than the others, 
and clothed in the same manner as those we 
had seen in the crater, namely, with spiked 
round helmets and cylindrical body-cases, and 
that each of the four carried a goad with spike 
and guard made of that same dull - looking 
metal as the bowls. These four closed about 
us, one on either side of each of us, as we 
emerged from our chamber into the cavern 
from which the light had come. 

We did not get our impression of that cavern 
all at once. Our attention was taken up by 
the movements and attitudes of the Selenites 
immediately about us, and by the necessity of 
controlling our motion, lest we should startle 
and alarm them and ourselves by some excessive stride. In front of us was the short, 
thick-set being who had solved the problem 
of asking us to get up, moving with gestures 
that seemed, almost all of them, intelligible 
to us, inviting us to follow him. His spoutlike face turned from one of us to the other 



156 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

with a quickness that was clearly interrogative. 
For a time, I say, we were taken up with these 
things. 

But at last the great place that formed a 
background to our movements asserted itself. 
It became apparent that the source of much, 
at least, of the tumult of sounds which had 
filled our ears ever since we had recovered 
from the stupefaction of the fungus was a vast 
mass of machinery in active movement, whose 
flying and whirling parts were visible indistinctly over the heads and between the bodies 
of the Selenites who walked about us. And 
not only did the web of sounds that filled the 
air proceed from this mechanism, but also 
the peculiar blue light that irradiated the whole 
place. We had taken it as a natural thing that 
a subterranean cavern should be artificially lit, 
and even now, though the fact was patent to 
my eyes, I did not really grasp its import until 
presently the darkness came. The meaning 
and structure of this huge apparatus we saw 
I cannot explain, because we neither of us 
learnt what it was for or how it worked. One 
after another, big shafts of metal flung out 
and up from its centre, their heads travelling 
in what seemed to me to be a parabolic path ; 
each dropped a sort of dangling arm as it rose 



EXPERIMENTS IN INTERCOURSE 157 

towards the apex of its flight and plunged 
down into a vertical cylinder, forcing this down 
before it. About it moved the shapes of 
tenders, little figures that seemed vaguelydifferent from the beings about us. As each 
of the three dangling arms of the machine 
plunged down, there was a clank and then 
a roaring, and out of the top of the vertical 
cylinder came pouring this incandescent substance that lit the place, and ran over as milk 
runs over a boiling pot, and dripped luminously 
into a tank of light below. It was a cold blue 
light, a sort of phosphorescent glow but infinitely brighter, and from the tanks into which 
it fell it ran in conduits athwart the cavern. 

Thud, thud, thud, thud, came the sweeping 
arms of this unintelligible apparatus, and the 
light substance hissed and poured. At first 
the thing seemed only reasonably large and 
near to us, and then I saw how exceedingly 
little the Selenites upon it seemed, and I 
realised the full immensity of cavern and 
machine. I looked from this tremendous 
affair to the faces of the Selenites with a new 
respect. I stopped, and Cavor stopped, and 
stared at this thunderous engine. 

" But this is stupendous ! " I said. " What 
can it be for ? " 



iS8 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

Cavor's blue-lit face was full of an intelligent respect. I can't dream ! Surely these 
beings  Men could not make a thing like 
that ! Look at those arms, are they on 
connecting rods ? " 

The thick-set Selenite had gone some paces 
unheeded. He came back and stood between 
us and the great machine. I avoided seeing 
him, because I guessed somehow that his idea 
was to beckon us onward. He walked away 
in the direction he wished us to go, and turned 
and came back, and flicked our faces to attract 
our attention. 

Cavor and I looked at one another. 

" Cannot we show him we are interested in 
the machine." I said. 

"Yes," said Cavor. "We'll try that." He 
turned to our guide and smiled, and pointed to 
the machine, and pointed again, and then to 
his head, and then to the machine. By some 
defect of reasoning he seemed to imagine that 
broken English might help these gestures. 
"Me look 'im," he said, "me think 'im very 
much. Yes." 

His behaviour seemed to check the Selenites 
in their desire for our progress for a moment. 
They faced one another, their queer heads 
moved, the twittering voices came quick and 



EXPERIMENTS IN INTERCOURSE 159 

liquid. Then one of them, a lean, tall creature, 
with a sort of mantle added to the puttee in 
which the others were dressed, twisted his 
elephant trunk of a hand about Cavor's waist, 
and pulled him gently to follow our guide, who 
again went on ahead. 

Cavor resisted. " We may just as well begin 
explaining ourselves now. They may think we 
are new animals, a new sort of mooncalf perhaps ! It is most important that we should 
show an intelligent interest from the outset." 

He began to shake his head violently. " No, 
no," he said, me not come on one minute. 
Me look at 'im." 
' Isn't there some geometrical point you 
might bring in apropos of that affair ? " I suggested, as the Selenites conferred again. 

"Possibly a parabolic  " he began. 

He yelled loudly, and leaped six feet or 
more! 

One of the four armed moon-men had pricked 
him with a goad ! 

I turned on the goad-bearer behind me with a 
swift threatening gesture, and he started back. 
This and Cavor's sudden shout and leap clearly 
astonished all the Selenites. They receded 
hastily, facing us. For one of those moments 
that seem to last for ever, we stood in angry 



i6o THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

protest, with a scattered semicircle of these inhuman beings about us. 

"He pricked me ! " said Cavor, with a catching of the voice. 
 I saw him," I answered. 

"Confound it!" I said to the Selenites ; 
" we're not going to stand that ! What on 
earth do you take us for?" 

I glanced quickly right and left. Far away 
across the blue wilderness of cavern I saw a 
number of other Selenites running towards us ; 
broad and slender they were, and one with a 
larger head than the others. The cavern spread 
wide and low, and receded in every direction 
into darkness. Its roof, I remember, seemed 
to bulge down as if with the weight of the vast 
thickness of rocks that prisoned us. There was 
no way out of it  no way out of it. Above, 
below, in every direction, was the unknown, 
and these inhuman creatures, with goads and 
gestures, confronting us, and we two unsupported men! 



XV 

THE GIDDY BRIDGE 

Just for a moment that hostile pause endured 
I suppose that both we and the Selenites did 
some_ very rapid thinking. My clearest impression was that there was nothing to put my 
back against, and that we were bound to be 
surrounded and killed. The overwhelming 
folly of our presence there loomed over me 
in black, enormous reproach. Why had I 
ever launched myself on this mad, inhuman 
expedition ? 

Cavor came to my side and laid his hand 
on my arm. His pale and terrified face was 
ghastly m the blue light. 

;'We can't do anything," he said. "It's a 
mistake. They don't understand. We must 
go. As they want us to go." 

I looked down at him, and then at the fresh 
belenites who were coming to help their fellows.  If I had my hands free " 

" It's no use' he panted. 



1 62 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

"No." 

" We'll go." 

And he turned about and led the way in the 
direction that had been indicated for us. 

I followed, trying to look as subdued as possible, and feeling at the chains about my wrists. 
My blood was boiling. I noted nothing more 
of that cavern, though it seemed to take a long 
time before we had marched across it, or if I 
noted anything I forgot it as I saw it. My 
thoughts were concentrated, I think, upon my 
chains and the Selenites, and particularly upon 
the helmeted ones with the goads. At first 
they marched parallel with us, and at a respectful distance, but presently they were overtaken 
by three others, and then they drew nearer, 
until they were within arm's length again. I 
winced like a beaten horse as they came near 
to us. The shorter, thicker Selenite marched 
at first on our right flank, but presently came 
in front of us again. 

How well the picture of that grouping has 
bitten into my brain ; the back of Cavor's 
downcast head just in front of me, and the 
dejected droop of his shoulders, and our guide's 
gaping visage, perpetually jerking about him, 
and the goad-bearers on either side, watchful, 
yet open-mouthed  a blue monochrome. And, 



THE GIDDY BRIDGE 163 

after all, I do remember one other thing besides 
the purely personal affair, which is, that a sort 
of gutter came presently across the floor of the 
cavern, and then ran along by the side of the 
path of rock we followed. And it was full of 
that same bright blue luminous stuff that flowed 
out of the great machine. I walked close beside it, and I can testify it radiated not a particle of heat. It was brightly shining, and yet 
it was neither warmer nor colder than anything 
else in the cavern. 

Clang, clang, clang, we passed right under 
the thumping levers of another vast machine, 
and so came at last to a wide tunnel, in which 
we could even hear the pad, pad of our shoeless 
feet, and which, save for the trickling thread of 
blue to the right of us, was quite unlit. The 
shadows made gigantic travesties of our shapes 
and those of the Selenites on the irregular wall 
and roof of the tunnel. Ever and again crystals 
in the walls of the tunnel scintillated like gems, 
ever and again the tunnel expanded into a 
stalactitic cavern, or gave off branches that 
vanished into darkness. 

We seemed to be marching down that tunnel 
for a long time. " Trickle, trickle," went the 
flowing light very softly, and our footfalls and 
their echoes made an irregular paddle, paddle. 



i64 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

My mind settled down to the question of my 
chains. If I were to slip off one turn so, and 
then to twist it so . . . 

If I tried to do it very gradually, would they 
see I was slipping my wrist out of the looser 
turn ? If they did, what would they do ? 

" Bedford," said Cavor,  it goes down. It 
keeps on going down." 

His remark roused me from my sullen preoccupation. 
' If they wanted to kill us' he said, dropping 
back to come level with me, " there is no reason 
why they should not have done it." 

"No," I admitted, "that's true." 

" They don't understand us," he said, "they 
think we are merely strange animals, some 
wild sort of mooncalf birth, perhaps. It 
will be only when they have observed us 
better that they will begin to think we have 
minds " 

" When you trace those geometrical problems," said I. 

"It may be that." 

We tramped on for a space. 

"You see," said Cavor, "these may be 
Selenites of a lower class." 

" The infernal fools ! " said I viciously, 
glancing at their exasperating faces. 



THE GIDDY BRIDGE 165 

"If we endure what they do to us " 

"We've got to endure it," said I. 

" There may be others less stupid. This 
is the mere outer fringe of their world. It 
must go down and down, cavern, passage, 
tunnel, down at last to the sea  hundreds of 
miles below," 

His words made me think of the mile or so 
of rock and tunnel that might be over our heads 
already. It was like a weight dropping on my 
shoulders. "Away from the sun and air," I 
said. " Even a mine half a mile deep is stuffy." 

"This is not, anyhow. It's probable  
Ventilation! The air would blow from the 
dark side of the moon to the sunlit, and all 
the carbonic acid would well out there and 
feed those plants. Up this tunnel, for example, 
there is quite a breeze. And what a world it 
must be. The earnest we have in that shaft, 
and those machines " 

"And the goad," I said. "Don't forget the 
goad ! " 

He walked a little in front of me for a time. 

" Even that goad  " he said. 

" Well ? " 

" I was angry at the time. But  It was 
perhaps necessary we should get on. They 
have different skins, and probably different 



i66 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

nerves. They may not understand our objection  Just as a being from Mars might not 
like our earthly habit of nudging " 

" They'd better be careful how they nudge 

> 
me. 

" And about that geometry. After all, their 
way is a way of understanding, too. They 
besin with the elements of life and not of 
thought. Food. Compulsion. Pain. They 
strike at fundamentals." 

" There's no doubt about that' I said. 

He went on to talk of the enormous and 
wonderful world into which we were being 
taken. I realised slowly from his tone, that 
even now he was not absolutely in despair at 
the prospect of going ever deeper into this 
inhuman planet - burrow. His mind ran on 
machines and invention, to the exclusion of a 
thousand dark things that beset me. It wasn't 
that he intended to make any use of these 
things, he simply wanted to know them. 

"After all," he said,'this is a tremendous 
occasion. It is the meeting of two worlds! 
What are we going to see? Think of what 
is below us here." 

" We shan't see much if the light isn't 
better," I remarked. 

" This is only the outer crust. Down 



THE GIDDY BRIDGE 167 

below  On this scale  There will be everything. Do you notice how different they seem 
one from another ? The story we shall take 
back ! " 

" Some rare sort of animal," I said, " might 
comfort himself in that way while they were 
bringing him to the Zoo. ... It doesn't follow 
that we are going to be shown all these things." 

" When they find we have reasonable minds," 
said Cavor, ' they will want to learn about the 
earth. Even if they have no generous emotions, they will teach in order to learn. . . . 
And the things they must know ! The unanticipated things ! " 

He went on to speculate on the possibility 
of their knowing things he had never hoped 
to learn on earth, speculating in that way, with 
a raw wound from that goad already in his 
skin ! Much that he said I forget, for my 
attention was drawn to the fact that the tunnel 
along which we had been marching was opening out wider and wider. We seemed, from 
the feeling of the air, to be going out into a 
huge space. But how big the space might 
really be we could not tell, because it was unlit. 
Our little stream of light ran in a dwindling thread and vanished far ahead. Presently 
the rocky walls had vanished altogether on 



1 68 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

either hand. There was nothing to be seen 
but the path in front of us and the trickling, 
hurrying rivulet of blue phosphorescence. The 
figures of Cavor and the guiding Selenite 
marched before me, the sides of their legs and 
heads that were towards the rivulet were clear 
and bright blue, their darkened sides, now that 
the reflection of the tunnel wall no longer lit 
them, merged indistinguishably in the darkness 
beyond. 

And soon I perceived that we were approaching a declivity of some sort, because the little 
blue stream dipped suddenly out of sight. 

In another moment, as it seemed, we had 
reached the edge. The shining stream gave 
one meander of hesitation and then rushed 
over. It fell to a depth at which the sound 
of its descent was absolutely lost to us. Far 
below was a bluish glow, a sort of blue mist  
at an infinite distance below. And the darkness the stream dropped out of became utterly void and black, save that a thing like a 
plank projected from the edge of the cliff and 
stretched out and faded and vanished altogether. There was a warm air blowing up out 
of the gulf. 

For a moment I and Cavor stood as near 
the edge as we dared, peering into a blue


THE GIDDY BRIDGE 169 

tinged profundity. And then our guide was 
pulling at my arm. 

Then he left me, and walked to the end of 
that plank and stepped upon it, looking back. 
Then when he perceived we watched him, he 
turned about and went on along it, walking 
as surely as though he was on firm earth. For 
a moment his form was distinct, then he became a blue blur, and then vanished into the 
obscurity. I became aware of some vague 
shape looming darkly out of the black. 

There was a pause. " Surely  ! " said 
Cavor. 

One of the other Selenites walked a few 
paces out upon the plank, and turned and 
looked back at us unconcernedly. The others 
stood ready to follow after us. Our guide's 
expectant figure reappeared. He was returning to see why we had not advanced. 

" What is that beyond there ? " I asked. 

" I can't see." 

' We can't cross this at any price," said I. 

" I could not go three steps on it," said 
Cavor, " even with my hands free." 

We looked at each other's drawn faces in 
blank consternation. 

"They can't know what it is to be giddy!" 
said Cavor. 



I70 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" It's quite impossible for us to walk that 
plank." 

" I don't believe they see as we do. I've 
been watching them. I wonder if they know 
this is simply blackness for us. How can 
we make them understand ? " 

" Anyhow, we must make them understand." 

I think we said these things with a vague 
half hope the Selenites might somehow understand. I knew quite clearly that all that was 
needed was an explanation. Then as. I saw 
their faces, I realised that an explanation was 
impossible. Just here it was that our resemblances were not going to bridge our 
differences. Well, I wasn't going to walk 
the plank, anyhow. I slipped my wrist very 
quickly out of the coil of chain that was loose, 
and then began to twist my wrists in opposite 
directions. I was standing nearest to the 
bridge, and as I did this two of the Selenites laid hold of me, and pulled me gently 
towards it. 

I shook my head violently. " No go," I 
said, " no use. You don't understand." 

Another Selenite added his compulsion. I 
was forced to step forward. 

 I've got an idea," said Cavor ; but I knew 
his ideas. 



THE GIDDY BRIDGE 171 

" Look here ! " I exclaimed to the Selenites. 
" Steady on ! It's all very well for you " 

I sprang round upon my heel. I burst out 
into curses. For one of the armed Selenites 
had stabbed me behind with his goad. 

I wrenched my wrists free from the little 
tentacles that held them. I turned on the 
goad-bearer. " Confound you ! " I cried, "I've 
warned you of that. What on earth do you 
think I'm made of, to stick that into me. If 
you touch me again ! " 

By way of answer he pricked me forthwith. 

I heard Cavor's voice in alarm and entreaty. 
Even then I think he wanted to compromise 
with these creatures. " I say, Bedford," he 
cried, " I know a way ! " But the sting of that 
second stab seemed to set free some pent-up 
reserve of energy in my being. Instantly the 
link of the wrist-chain snapped, and with it 
snapped all considerations that had held us 
unresisting in the hands of these moon creatures. For that second, at least, I was mad 
with fear and anger. I took no thought of 
consequences. I hit straight out at the face 
of the thing with the goad. The chain was 
twisted round my fist. . . . 

There came another of these beastly surprises of which the moon world Is full. 



172 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

My mailed hand seemed to go clean through 
him. He smashed like  like some softish sort 
of sweet with liquid in it! He broke right 
in! He squelched and splashed. It was like 
hitting a damp toadstool. The flimsy body 
went spinning a dozen yards, and fell with 
a flabby impact. I was astonished. I was 
incredulous that any living thing could be so 
flimsy. For an instant I could have believed 
the whole thing a dream. 

Then it had become real and imminent again. 
Neither Cavor nor the other Selenites seemed 
to have done anything from the time when I 
had turned about to the time when the dead 
Selenite hit the ground. Every one stood 
back from us two, every one alert. That 
arrest seemed to last at least a second after 
the Selenite was down. Every one must have 
been taking the thing in. I seem to remember 
myself standing with my arm half retracted, 
trying also to take it in.' What next ? " 
clamoured my brain ; " what next ? " Then 
in a moment every one was moving ! 

I perceived we must get our chains loose, 
and that before we could do this these Selenites had to be beaten off. I faced towards the 
group of the three goad - bearers. Instantly 
one threw his goad at me. It swished over 



THE GIDDY BRIDGE 173 

my head, and I suppose went flying into the 
abyss behind. 

I leaped right at him with all my might as 
the goad flew over me. He turned to run 
as I jumped, and I bore him to the ground, 
came down right upon him, and slipped upon 
his smashed body and fell. He seemed to 
wriggle under my foot. 

I came into a sitting position, and on every 
hand the blue backs of the Selenites were 
receding into the darkness. I bent a link by 
main force and untwisted the chain that had 
hampered me about the ankles, and sprang to 
my feet, with the chain in my hand. Another 
goad, flung javelin-wise, whistled by me, and 
I made a rush towards the darkness out of 
which it had come. Then I turned back 
towards Cavor, who was still standing in the 
light of the rivulet near the gulf convulsively 
busy with his wrists, and at the same time 
jabbering nonsense about his idea. 

" Come on ! " I cried. 
 My hands ! " he answered. 

Then, realising that I dared not run back to 
him, because my ill-calculated steps might carry 
me over the edge, he came shuffling towards 
me, with his hands held out before him. 

I gripped his chains at once to unfasten them. 



174 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" Where are they ? " he panted. 

" Run away. They'll come back. They're 
throwing things ! Which way shall we go?" 

" By the light. To that tunnel. Eh ? " 

" Yes," said I, and his hands were free. 

I dropped on my knees and fell to work on 
his ankle bonds. Whack came something  
I know not what  and splashed the livid 
streamlet into drops about us. Far away on 
our right a piping and whistling began. 

I whipped the chain off his feet, and put 
it in his hand. "Hit with that!" I said, and 
without waiting for an answer, set off in big 
bounds along the path by which we had come. 
I had a nasty sort of feeling that these things 
could jump out of the darkness on to my back. 
I heard the impact of his leaps come following 
after me. 

We ran in vast strides. But that running, 
you must understand, was an altogether different thing from any running on earth. On 
earth one leaps and almost instantly hits the 
ground again, but on the moon, because of 
its weaker pull, one shot through the air for 
several seconds before one came to earth. In 
spite of our violent hurry this gave an effect 
of long pauses, pauses in which one might 
have counted seven or eight. " Step," and one 



THE GIDDY BRIDGE 175 

soared off! All sorts of questions ran through 
my mind : " Where are the Selenites ? What 
will they do ? Shall we ever get to that tunnel ? 
Is Cavor far behind ? Are they likely to cut 
him off?" Then whack, stride, and off again 
for another step. 

I saw a Selenite running in front of me, his 
legs going exactly as a man's would go on 
earth, saw him glance over his shoulder, and 
heard him shriek as he ran aside out of my 
way into the darkness. He was, I think, our 
guide, but I am not sure. Then in another 
vast stride the walls of rock had come into 
view on either hand, and in two more strides 
I was in the tunnel, and tempering my pace 
to its low roof. I went on to a bend, then 
stopped and turned back, and plug, plug, plug, 
Cavor came into view, splashing into the stream 
of blue light at every stride, and grew larger 
and blundered into me. We stood clutching 
each other. For a moment, at least, we had 
shaken off our captors and were alone. 

We were both very much out of breath. 
We spoke in panting, broken sentences. 
" You've spoilt it all ! " panted Cavor. 
Nonsense," I cried. "It was that or 
death ! " 

' What are we to do ? " 



176 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" Hide. " 

" How can we ? " 
' It's dark enough." 

" But where ? " 
' Up one of these side caverns." 

 And then ? " 

" Think." 
 Right  come on." 

We strode on, and presently came to a 
radiating dark cavern. Cavor was in front. 
He hesitated, and chose a black mouth that 
seemed to promise good hiding. He went 
towards it and turned. 

" It's dark," he said. 

"Your legs and feet will light us. You're 
wet with that luminous stuff." 

- But " 

A tumult of sounds, and in particular a 
sound like a clanging gong, advancing up the 
main tunnel, became audible. It was horribly 
suggestive of a tumultuous pursuit. We made 
a bolt for the unlit side cavern forthwith. As 
we ran along it our way was lit by the irradiation of Cavor's legs. " It's lucky," I panted, ' they took off our boots, or we should fill this 
place with clatter." On we rushed, taking as 
small steps as we could to avoid striking the 
roof of the cavern. After a time we seemed 




.ii' inW! 



\9 




Bedford," he whispered, " tliere's a sort of hght iu front of Ub " 



THE GIDDY BRIDGE 177 

to be gaining on the uproar. It became 
muffled, it dwindled, it died away. 

I stopped and looked back, and I heard 
the pad, pad of Cavor's feet receding. Then 
he stopped also. " Bedford," he whispered ; 
"there's a sort of light in front of us." 

I looked, and at first could see nothing. 
Then I perceived his head and shoulders 
dimly outlined against a fainter darkness. I 
saw, also, that this mitigation of the darkness 
was not blue, as all the other light within the 
moon had been, but a pallid grey, a very vague, 
faint white, the daylight colour. Cavor noted 
this difference as soon or sooner than I did, 
and I think, too, that it filled him with much 
the same wild hope. 
' Bedford," he whispered, and his voice 
trembled. " That light  it is possible " 

He did not dare to say the thing he hoped. 
Then came a pause. Suddenly I knew by the 
sound of his feet that he was striding towards 
that pallor. I followed him with a beating 
heart. 



M 



XVI 

POINTS OF VIEW 

The light grew stronger as we advanced. In 
a little time it was nearly as strong as the 
phosphorescence on Cavor's legs. Our tunnel 
was expanding into a cavern, and this new 
light was at the farther end of it. I perceived something that set my hopes leaping 
and bounding. 

" Cavor," I said, " it comes from above ! I 
am certain it comes from above ! " 

He made no answer, but hurried on. 

Indisputably it was a grey light, a silvery 
light. 

In another moment we were beneath it. It 
filtered down through a chink in the walls of 
the cavern, and as I stared up, drip, came a 
drop of water upon my face. I started and 
stood aside  drip, fell another drop quite 
audibly on the rocky floor. 

" Cavor," I said, " if one of us lifts the other, 

he can reach that crack ! " 

X78 



POINTS OF VIEW 179 

" I'll lift you," he said, and incontinently 
hoisted me as though I was a baby. 

I thrust an arm into the crack, and just at 
my finger tips found a little ledge by which I 
could hold. I could see the white light was 
very much brighter now. I pulled myself up 
by two fingers with scarcely an effort, though 
on earth I weigh twelve stone, reached to a 
still higher corner of rock, and so got my 
feet on the narrow ledge. I stood up and 
searched up the rocks with my fingers ; the 
cleft broadened out upwardly. "It's climbable," I said to Cavor. " Can you jump up 
to my hand if I hold it down to you ? " 

I wedged myself between the sides of the 
cleft, rested knee and foot on the ledge, and 
extended a hand. I could not see Cavor, but 
I could hear the rustle of his movements as he 
crouched to spring. Then whack and he was 
hanging to my arm  and no heavier than a 
kitten ! I lugged him up until he had a hand 
on my ledge, and could release me. 

" Confound it ! " I said, " any one could be a 
mountaineer on the moon ; " and so set myself 
in earnest to the climbing. For a few minutes 
I clambered steadily, and then I looked up again. 
The cleft opened out steadily, and the light 
was brighter. Only 



i8o THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

It was not daylight after all ! 

In another moment I could see what It was, 
and at the sight I could have beaten my head 
against the rocks with disappointment. For I 
beheld simply an irregularly sloping open space, 
and all over its slanting floor stood a forest of 
little club-shaped fungi, each shining gloriously 
with that pinkish silvery light. For a moment 
I stared at their soft radiance, then sprang forward and upward among them. I plucked up 
half-a-dozen and flung them against the rocks, 
and then sat down, laughing bitterly, as Cavor's 
ruddy face came into view. 
' It's phosphorescence again ! " I said. No 
need to hurry. Sit down and make yourself 
at home." And as he spluttered over our 
disappointment, I began to lob more of these 
growths into the cleft. 

" I thought it was daylight," he said. 

" Daylight ! " cried I. " Daybreak, sunset, 
clouds, and windy skies ! Shall we ever see 
such things again ? " = 

As I spoke, a little picture of our world 
seemed to rise before me, bright and little and 
clear, like the background of some old Italian 
picture. " The sky that changes, and the sea 
that changes, and the hills and the green trees 
and the towns and cities shining in the sun. 



POINTS OF VIEW i8i 

Think of a wet roof at sunset, Cavor ! Think 
of the windows of a westward house ! " 

He made no answer. 

" Here we are burrowing in this beastly 
world that isn't a world, with its inky ocean 
hidden in some abominable blackness below, 
and outside that torrid day and that death 
stillness of night. And all those things that 
are chasing us now, beastly men of leather  
insect men, that come out of a nightmare ! 
After all, they're right! What business have 
we here smashing them and disturbing their 
world ? For all we know the whole planet is 
up and after us already. In a minute we may 
hear them whimpering, and their gongs going. 
What are we to do ? Where are we to go ? 
Here we are as comfortable as snakes from 
Jamrach's loose in a Surbiton villa ! " 

"It was your fault," said Cavor. 

" My fault ! " I shouted. " Good Lord ! " 

" I had an idea ! " 

" Curse your ideas ! " 

" If we had refused to budge " 

" Under these goads ? " 
 Yes. They would have carried us ! " 

" Over that bridge ? " 

" Yes. They must have carried us from 
outside." 



1 82 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

"I'd rather be carried by a fly across a 
ceiling." 

" Good Heavens ! " 

I resumed my destruction of the fungi. 
Then suddenly I saw something that struck me 
even then. 

" Cavor," I said, these chains are of gold ! " 

He was thinking intently, with his hands 
gripping his cheeks. He turned his head 
slowly and stared at me, and when I had repeated my words, at the twisted chain about 
his right hand. "So they are," he said, "so 
they are." His face lost its transitory interest 
even as he looked. He hesitated for a moment, 
then went on with his interrupted meditation. 
I sat for a space puzzling over the fact that I 
had only just observed this, until I considered 
the blue light in which we had been, and which 
had taken all the colour out of the metal. And 
from that discovery I also started upon a train 
of thought that carried me wide and far. I 
forgot that I had just been asking what business we had in the moon. Gold 

It was Cavor who spoke first. "It seems 
to me that there are two courses open to 
us." 

"Well?" 

" Either we can attempt to make our way  



POINTS OF VIEW 183 

fight our way if necessary out to the exterior 
again, and then hunt for our sphere until 
we find it, or the cold of the night comes to 

kill us, or else " 

He paused. " Yes ? " I said, though I knew 
what was coming. 

" We might attempt once more to establish 
some sort of understanding with the minds of 
the people in the moon." 

" So far as I'm concerned  it's the first " 
" I doubt." 
" I don't." 

" You see," said Cavor, " I do not think we 
can judge the Selenites by what we have seen 
of them. Their central world, their civilised 
world will be far below in the profounder 
caverns about their sea. This region of the 
crust in which we are is an outlying district, a 
pastoral region. At any rate, that is my interpretation. These Selenites we have seen may 
be only the equivalent of cowboys and engine 
tenders. Their use of goads- in all probability mooncalf goads the lack of imagination 
they show in expecting us to be able to do just 
what they can do, their indisputable brutality, 
all seem to point to something of that sort. 

But if we endured " 

" Neither of us could endure a six-inch 



i84 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

plank across the bottomless pit for very 
long." 
 No," said Cavor ; "but then " 

" I won'," I said. 

He discovered a new line of possibilities. 
" Well, suppose we got ourselves into some 
corner, where we could defend ourselves 
against these hinds and labourers. If, for 
example, we could hold out for a week or so, 
it is probable that the news of our appearance 
would filter down to the more intelligent and 
populous parts " 
' If they exist." 
' They must exist, or whence came those 
tremendous machines ? " 

" That's possible, but it's the worst of the 
two chances." 

" We might write up inscriptions on walls  " 
' How do we know their eyes would see the 
sort of marks we made ? " 
' If we cut them " 
 That's possible, of course." 

I took up a new thread of thought. After 
all," I said, " I suppose you don't think these 
Selenites so infinitely wiser than men." 

"They must know a lot more  or at least a 
lot of different things." 

" Yes, but  " I hesitated. 



POINTS OF VIEW 185 

" I think you'll quite admit, Cavor, that you're 
rather an exceptional man." 
"How?" 

" Well, you you're a rather lonely manhave been, that is. You haven't married." 

' Never wanted to. But why ? " 

" And you never grew richer than you happened to be ? " 

" Never wanted that either." 

" You've just rooted after knowledge ? " 

" Well, a certain curiosity is natural " 

" You think so. That's just it. You think 
every other mind wants to now. I remember 
once, when I asked you why you conducted all 
these researches, you said you wanted your 
F.R.S., and to have, the stuff called Cavorite, 
and things like that. You know perfectly well 
you didn't do it for that ; but at the time my 
question took you by surprise, and you felt you 
ought to have something to look like a motive. 
Really you conducted researches because you 
ad to. It's your twist." 

" Perhaps it is " 

" It isn't one man in a million has that twist. 
Most men want well, various things, but very 
few want knowledge for its own sake, don't, 
I know perfectly well. Now, these Selenites 
seem to be a driving, busy sort of being, but 



1 86 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

how do you know that even the most intelliofent will take an interest in us or our world ? 
I don't believe they'll even know we have a 
world. They never come out at night  they'd 
freeze if they did. They've probably never 
seen any heavenly body at all except the blazing 
sun. How are they to know there zs another 
world ? What does it matter to them if they 
do ? Well, even if they kave had a glimpse of 
a few stars, or even of the earth crescent, what 
of that ? Why should people living inside a 
planet trouble to observe that sort of thing ? 
Men wouldn't have done it except for the 
seasons and sailing ; why should the moon 
people ? . . . 

" Well, suppose there are a few philosophers 
like yourself. They are just the very Selenites 
who'll never hear of our existence. Suppose a 
Selenite had dropped on the earth when you 
were at Lympne, you'd have been the last man 
in the world to hear he had come. You never 
read a newspaper ! You see the chances against 
you. Well, it's for these chances we're sitting 
here doing nothing while precious time is flying. 
I tell you we've got into a fix. We've come 
unarmed, we've lost our sphere, we've got no 
food, we've shown ourselves to the Selenites, 
and made them think we're strange, strong, 



POINTS OF VIEW 187 

dangerous animals ; and unless these Selenites 
are perfect fools, they'll set about now and 
hunt us till they find us, and when they find 
us they'll try and take us if they can, and kill us 
if they can't, and that's the end of the matter. 
If they take us, they'll probably kill us, through 
some misunderstanding. After we're done for, 
they may discuss us perhaps, but we shan't get 
much fun out of that." 

' Go on." 

" On the other hand, here's gold knocking 
about like cast iron at home. If only we can 
get some of it back, if only we can find our 
sphere again before they do, and get back, 
then " 

"Yes?" 

" We might put the thing on a sounder 
footing. Come back in a bigger sphere with 
guns." 
 Good Lord ! " cried Cavor, as though that 
was horrible. 

I shied another luminous fungus down the 
cleft. 

" Look here, Cavor," I said, " I've half the 
voting power anyhow in this affair, and this is 
a case for a practical man. I'm a practical 
man, and you are not. I'm not going to trust 
to Selenites and geometrical diagrams again, if 



1 88 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

I can help it. . . . That's all. Get back. Drop 
all this secrecy  or most of it. And come 
again." 

He reflected. "When I came to the moon," 
he said, " I ought to have come alone." 

" The question before the meeting," I said,  is how to get back to the sphere." 

For a time we nursed our knees in silence. 
Then he seemed to decide for my reasons. 

" I think," he said, " one can get data. It is 
clear that while the sun is on this side of the 
moon the air will be blowing through this 
planet sponge from the dark side hither. On 
this side, at any rate, the air will be expanding and flowing out of the moon caverns into 
the craters. . . . Very well, there's a draught 
here." 

" So there is." 

" And that means that this is not a dead end ; 
somewhere behind us this cleft goes on and up. 
The draught is blowing up, and that is the way 
we have to go. If we try and get up any sort 
of chimney or gully there is, we shall not only 
get out of these passages where they are hunting for us " 

" But suppose the gully is too narrow ? " 
 We'll come down again." 

" Ssh ! " I said suddenly ; " what's that ? " 



POINTS OF VIEW 189 

We listened. At first it was an indistinct 
murmur, and then one picked out the clang of 
a gong. " They must think we are mooncalves," said I, "to be frightened at that." 

" They're coming along that passage," said 
Cavor. 

" They must be." 

"They'll not think of the cleft. They'll go 
past." 

I listened again for a space. " This time," 
I whispered, "they're likely to have some sort 
of weapon." 

Then suddenly I sprang to my feet.' Good 
heavens, Cavor!" I cried. "But they wz7! 
They'll see the fungi I have been pitching 
down. They'll ! " 

I didn't finish my sentence. I turned about 
and made a leap over the fungus tops towards 
the upper end of the cavity. I saw that the 
space turned upward and became a draughty 
cleft again, ascending to impenetrable darkness. I was about to clamber up into this, and 
then with a happy inspiration turned back. 

" What are you doing ? " asked Cavor. 

" Go on ! " said I, and went back and got two 
of the shining fungi, and putting one into the 
breast pocket of my flannel jacket, so that it 
stuck out to light our climbing, went back with 



igo THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

the other for Cavor. The noise of the Selenites 
was now so loud that it seemed they must be 
already beneath the cleft. But it might be they 
would have difficulty in clambering into it, or 
might hesitate to ascend it against our possible 
resistance. At any rate, we had now the comforting knowledge of the enormous muscular 
superiority our birth in another planet gave 
us. In another minute I was clambering with 
gigantic vigour after Cavor's blue-lit heels. 



XVII 

THE FIGHT IN THE CAVE OF THE MOON BUTCHERS 

I DO not know how far we clambered before 
we came to the grating. It may be we ascended only a few hundred feet, but at the 
time it seemed to me we might have hauled 
and jammed and hopped and wedged ourselves 
through a mile or more of vertical ascent. 
Whenever I recall that time, there comes into 
my head the heavy clank of our golden chains 
that followed every movement. Very soon 
my knuckles and knees were raw, and I had 
a bruise on one cheek. After a time the first 
violence of our efforts diminished, and our 
movements became more deliberate and less 
painful. The noise of the pursuing Selenites 
had died away altogether. It seemed almost 
as though they had not traced us up the crack 
after all, in spite of the tell-tale heap of broken 
fungi that must have lain beneath it. At times 
the cleft narrowed so much that we could scarce 
squeeze up it ; at others it expanded into great 



192 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

drusy cavities, studded with prickly crystals, 
or thickly beset with dull, shining fungoid 
pimples. Sometimes it twisted spirally, and 
at other times slanted down nearly to the 
horizontal direction. Ever and again there 
was the intermittent drip and trickle of water 
by us. Once or twice it seemed to us that 
small living things had rustled out of our 
reach, but what they were we never saw. 
They may have been venomous beasts for all 
I know, but they did us no harm, and we were 
now tuned to a pitch when a weird creeping 
thing more or less mattered little. And at 
last, far above, came the familiar bluish light 
again, and then we saw that it filtered through 
a grating that barred our way. 

We whispered as we pointed this out to one 
another, and became more and more cautious 
in our ascent. Presently we were close under 
the grating, and by pressing my face against 
its bars I could see a limited portion of the 
cavern beyond. It was clearly a large space, 
and lit no doubt by some rivulet of the same 
blue light that we had seen flow from the 
beating machinery. An intermittent trickle 
of water dropped ever and again between the 
bars near my face. 

My first endeavour was naturally to see 



THE FIGHT IN THE CAVE 193 

what might be upon the floor of the cavern, 
but our grating lay in a depression whose rim 
hid all this from our eyes. Our foiled attention then fell back upon the suggestion of 
the various sounds we heard, and presently 
my eye caught a number of faint shadows that 
played across the dim roof far overhead. 

Indisputably there were several Selenites, 
perhaps a considerable number, in this space, 
for we could hear the noises of their intercourse, and faint sounds that I identified as 
their footfalls. There was also a succession 
of regularly repeated sounds  chid, chid, chid 
 which began and ceased, suggestive of a 
knife or spade hacking at some soft substance. 
Then came a clank as if of chains, a whistle 
and a rumble as of a truck running over a 
hollowed place, and then again that chid, chid, 
chid resumed. The shadows told of shapes 
that moved quickly and rhythmically, in agreement with that regular sound, and rested when 
it ceased. 

We put our heads close together, and began 
to discuss these things in noiseless whispers. 

" They are occupied," I said, " they are 
occupied in some way." 

"Yes." 

" They're not seeking us, or thinking of us." 

N 



194 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" Perhaps they have not heard of us." 

" Those others are hunting about below. 
If suddenly we appeared here " 

We looked at one another. 

" There might be a chance to parley," said 
Cavor. 

" No," I said. " Not as we are." 

For a space we remained, each occupied by 
his own thoughts. 

Chid, chid, chid went the chopping, and the 
shadows moved to and fro. 

I looked at the grating. " It's flimsy," I 
said. "We might bend two of the bars and 
crawl through." 

We wasted a little time in vague discussion. 
Then I took one of the bars in both hands, 
and got my feet up against the rock until they 
were almost on a level with my head, and so 
thrust against the bar. It bent so suddenly 
that I almost slipped. I clambered about and 
bent the adjacent bar in the opposite direction, 
and then took the luminous fungus from my 
pocket and dropped it down the fissure. 
 Don't do anything hastily," whispered 
Cavor, as I twisted myself up through the 
opening I had enlarged. I had a glimpse of 
busy figures as I came through the grating, 
and immediately bent down, so that the rim 



THE FIGHT IN THE CAVE 195 

of the depression in which the grating lay hid 
me from their eyes, and so lay flat, signalling 
advice to Cavor as he also prepared to come 
through. Presently we were side by side in 
the depression, peering over the edge at the 
cavern and its occupants. 

It was a much larger cavern than we had 
supposed from our first glimpse of it, and we 
looked up from the lowest portion of its sloping 
floor. It widened out as it receded from us, 
and its roof came down and hid the remoter 
portion altogether. And lying in a line along 
its length, vanishing at last far away in that 
tremendous perspective, were a number of 
huge shapes, huge pallid hulls, upon which 
the Selenites were busy. At first they seemed 
big white cylinders of vague import. Then 
I noted the heads upon them lying towards 
us, eyeless and skinless like the heads of sheep 
at a butcher's, and perceived they were the 
carcasses of mooncalves being cut up, much 
as the crew of a whaler might cut up a moored 
whale. They were cutting off the flesh in 
strips, and on some of the farther trunks the 
white ribs were showing. It was the sound 
of their hatchets that made that chid, chid. 
Some way away a thing like a trolley cable, 
drawn and loaded with chunks of lax meat. 



196 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

was running up the slope of the cavern floor. 
This enormous long avenue of hulls that were 
destined to be food, gave us a sense of the 
vast populousness of the moon world second 
only to the effect of our first glimpse down 
the shaft. 

It seemed to me at first that the Selenites 
must be standing on trestle-supported planks, 
and then I saw that the planks and supports 
and their hatchets were really of the same 
leaden hue as my fetters had seemed before 
white light came to bear on them. A number 
of very thick-looking crowbars lay about the 
floor, and had apparently assisted to turn the 
dead mooncalf over on its side. They were 
perhaps six feet long, with shaped handles, 
very tempting-looking weapons. The whole 
place was lit by three transverse streams of 
the blue fluid. 

We lay for a long time noting all these 
thines in silence. "Well ? " said Cavor at last. 

I crouched lower and turned to him. I had 
corrte upon a brilliant idea. " Unless they 
 I do not remember seeing any wooden things on the moon ; 
doors, tables, everything corresponding to our terrestrial joinery 
was made of metal, and I believe for the most part of gold, 
which as a metal would, of course, naturally recommend itself  
other things being equal  on account of the ease in working it, 
and its toughness and durability. 



THE FIGHT IN THE CAVE 197 

lowered those bodies by a crane," I said, "we 
must be nearer the surface than I thought" 

"Why?" 
 The mooncalf doesn't hop, and it hasn't 
got wings." 

He peered over the edge of the hollow again, 
"I wonder now . . ." he began. "After all, 
we have never gone far from the surface " 

I stopped him by a grip on his arm. I had 
heard a noise from the cleft below us ! 

We twisted ourselves about, and lay as still 
as death, with every sense alert. In a little 
while I did not doubt that something was 
quietly ascending the cleft. Very slowly and 
quite noiselessly I assured myself of a good 
grip on my chain, and waited for that something to appear. 

" Just look at those chaps with the hatchets 
again," I said. 

" They're all right," said Cavor. 

I took a sort of provisional aim at the gap in 
the grating. I could hear now quite distinctly 
the soft twittering of the ascending Selenites, 
the dab of their hands against the rock, and 
the falling of dust from their grips as they 
clambered. 

Then I could see that there was something 
moving dimly in the blackness below the 



198 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

grating, but what it might be I could not distinguish. The whole thing seemed to hang 
fire just for a moment  then smash ! I had 
sprung to my feet, struck savagely at something that had flashed out at me. It was the 
keen point of a spear. I have thought since 
that its length in the narrowness of the cleft 
must have prevented its being sloped to reach 
me. Anyhow, it shot out from the grating like 
the tongue of a snake, and missed and flew 
back and flashed again. But the second time 
I snatched and caught it, and wrenched it 
away, but not before another had darted ineffectually at me. 

I shouted with triumph as I felt the hold of 
the Selenite resist my pull for a moment and 
give, and then I was jabbing down through the 
bars, amidst squeals from the darkness, and 
Cavor had snapped off the other spear, and 
was leaping and flourishing it beside me, 
and making inefficient jabs. Clang, clang, 
came up through the grating, and then an axe 
hurtled through the air and whacked against 
the rocks beyond, to remind me of the fleshers 
at the carcasses up the cavern. 

I turned, and they were all coming towards 
us in open order waving their axes. They 
were short, thick, little beggars, with long 



THE FIGHT IN THE CAVE 199 

arms, strikingly different from the ones we 
had seen before. If they had not heard of us 
before, they must have reaHsed the situation 
with incredible swiftness. I stared at them 
for a moment, spear in hand. " Guard that 
grating, Cavor," I cried, howled to intimidate them, and rushed to meet them. Two 
of them missed with their hatchets, and the 
rest fled incontinently. Then the two also 
were sprinting away up the cavern, with hands 
clenched and heads down. I never saw men 
run like them ! 

I knew the spear I had was no good for me. 
It was thin and flimsy, only effectual for a 
thrust, and too long for a quick recover. So 
I only chased the Selenites as far as the first 
carcass, and stopped there and picked up one 
of the crowbars that were lying about. It felt 
confortingly heavy, and equal to smashing any 
number of Selenites. I threw away my spear, 
and picked up a second crowbar for the other 
hand. I felt five times better than I had with 
the spear. I shook the two threateningly at 
the Selenites, who had come to a halt in a little 
crowd far away up the cavern, and then turned 
about to look at Cavor. 

He was leaping from side to side of the 
grating, making threatening jabs with his 



200 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

broken spear. That was all right. It would 
keep the Selenites down  for a time at any 
rate. I looked up the cavern again. What 
on earth were we going to do now ? 

We were cornered in a sort of way already. 
But these butchers up the cavern had been 
surprised, they were probably scared, and they 
had no special weapons, only those little 
hatchets of theirs. And that way lay escape. 
Their sturdy little forms  ever so much shorter 
and thicker than the mooncalf herds  were 
scattered up the slope in a way that was eloquent of indecision. I had the moral advantage of a mad bull in a street. But for all 
that, there seemed a tremendous crowd of 
them. Very probably there was. Those 
Selenites down the cleft had certainly some 
infernally long spears. It might be they had 
other surprises for us. . . . But, confound it ! 
if we charged up the cave we should let them 
up behind us, and if we didn't, those little 
brutes up the cave would probably get reinforced. Heaven alone knew what tremendous 
engines of warfare  guns, bombs, terrestrial 
torpedoes  this unknown world below our feet, 
this vaster world of which we had only pricked 
the outer cuticle, might not presently send up 
to our destruction. It became clear the only 



THE FIGHT IN THE CAVE 201 

thing to do was to charge ! It became clearer 
as the legs of a number of fresh Selenites appeared running down the cavern towards us. 

" Bedford ! " cried Cavor, and behold ! he 
was half-way between me and the grating. 

"Go back!" I cried. "What are you 
doing " 

" They've got  it's like a gun ! " 

And struggling in the grating between those 
defensive spears appeared the head and shoulders of a singularly lean and angular Selenite, 
bearing some complicated apparatus. 

I realised Cavor's utter incapacity for the 
fight we had in hand. For a moment I hesitated. Then I rushed past him whirling my 
crowbars, and shouting to confound the aim of 
the Selenite. He was aiming in the queerest way with the thing against his stomach. Chu2z!" The thing wasn't a gun; it went 
off like a cross-bow more, and dropped me in 
the middle of a leap. 

I didn't fall down, I simply came down a 
little shorter than I should have done if I 
hadn't been hit, and from the feel of my 
shoulder the thing might have tapped me and 
glanced off. Then my left hand hit against 
the shaft, and I perceived there was a sort of 
spear sticking half through my shoulder. The 



202 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

moment after I got home with the crowbar 
in my right hand, and hit the Selenite fair 
and square. He collapsed  he crushed and 
crumpled  his head smashed like an egg. 

I dropped a crowbar, pulled the spear out of 
my shoulder, and began to jab it down the 
grating into the darkness. At each jab came 
a shriek and twitter. Finally I hurled the 
spear down upon them with all my strength, 
leapt up, picked up the crowbar again, and 
started for the multitude up the cavern. 
' Bedford ! " cried Cavor. " Bedford ! " as I 
flew past him. 

I seem to remember his footsteps coming 
on behind me. 

Step, leap . . . whack, step, leap. . . . 
Each leap seemed to last ages. With each, 
the cave opened out and the number of 
Selenites visible increased. At first they 
seemed all running about like ants in a disturbed ant-hill, one or two waving hatchets 
and coming to meet me, more running away, 
some bolting sideways into the avenue of 
carcasses, then presently others came in sight 
carrying spears, and then others. I saw a 
most extraordinary thing, all hands and feet, 
bolting for cover. The cavern grew darker 
farther up. Flick ! something flew over my 



THE FIGHT IN THE CAVE 203 

head. Flick ! As I soared in mid-stride I saw 
a spear hit and quiver in one of the carcasses 
to my left. Then, as I came down, one hit 
the ground before me, and I heard the remote 
chuzz ! with which their things were fired. 
Flick, flick ! for a moment it was a shower. 
They were volleying ! 

I stopped dead. 

I don't think I thought clearly then. I seem 
to remember a kind of stereotyped phrase running through my mind: "Zone of fire, seek 
cover ! " I know I made a dash for the ace 
between two of the carcasses, and stood there 
panting and feeling very wicked. 

I looked round for Cavor, and for a moment 
it seemed as if he had vanished from the world. 
Then he came out of the darkness between 
the row of the carcasses and the rocky wall 
of the cavern. I saw his little face, dark and 
blue, and shining with perspiration and emotion. 

He was saying something, but what it was 
I did not heed. I had realised that we might 
work from mooncalf to mooncalf up the cave 
until we were near enough to charge home. 
It was charge or nothing. "Come on!" I 
said, and led the way. 

" Bedford ! " he cried unavailingly. 

My mind was busy as we went up that 



204 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

narrow alley between the dead bodies and 
the wall of the cavern. The rocks curved 
about  they could not enfilade us. Though 
in that narrow space we could not leap, yet 
with our earth-born strength we were still able 
to go very much faster than the Selenites. 
I reckoned we should presently come right 
among them. Once we were on them, they 
would be nearly as formidable as black beetles. 
Only !  there would first of all be a volley. 
I thought of a stratagem. I whipped off my 
flannel jacket as I ran. 

" Bedford ! " panted Cavor behind me. 

I glanced back. " What ? " said I. 

He was pointing upward over the carcasses. ' White light ! " he said. " White light again ! " 

I looked, and it was even so, a faint white 
ghost of twilight in the remoter cavern roof. 
That seemed to give me double strength. 

" Keep close," I said. A flat, long Selenite 
dashed out of the darkness, and squealed and 
fled. I halted, and stopped Cavor with my 
hand. I hung my jacket over my crowbar, 
ducked round the next carcass, dropped jacket 
and crowbar, showed myself, and darted back. 
' Chuzz  flick," just one arrow came. We 
were close on the Selenites, and they were 
standing in a crowd, broad, short, and tall 



THE FIGHT IN THE CAVE 205 

together, with a little battery of their shooting 
implements pointing down the cave. Three 
or four other arrows followed the first, and 
then their fire ceased. 

I stuck out my head, and escaped by a 
hair's-breadth. This time I drew a dozen 
shots or more, and heard the Selenites shouting and twittering as if with excitement as they 
shot. I picked up jacket and crowbar again. 

''Now ! " said I, and thrust out the jacket. 

" Chuzz-zz-zz-zz ! Chuzz ! In an instant my 
jacket had grown a thick beard of arrows, and 
they were quivering all over the carcass behind 
us. Instantly I slipped the crowbar out of the 
jacket, dropped the jacket  for all I know to 
the contrary it is lying up there in the moon 
now  and rushed out upon them. 

For a minute perhaps it was massacre. I 
was too fierce to discriminate, and the Selenites 
were probably too scared to fight. At any 
rate they made no sort of fight against me. I 
saw scarlet, as the saying is. I remember I 
seemed to be wading among those leathery, 
thin things as a man wades through tall grass, 
mowing and hitting, first right, then left ; smash, 
smash. Little drops of moisture flew about. 
I trod on things that crushed and piped and 
went slippery. The crowd seemed to open 
and close and flow like water. They seemed 



2o6 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

to have no combined plan whatever. There 
were spears flew about me, I was grazed over 
the ear by one. I was stabbed once in the 
arm and once in the cheek, but I only found 
that out afterwards, when the blood had had 
time to run and cool and feel wet. 

What Cavor did I do not know. For a 
space it seemed that this fighting had lasted 
for an age, and must needs go on for ever. 
Then suddenly it was all over, and there was 
nothing to be seen but the backs of heads 
bobbing up and down as their owners ran in 
all directions ... I seemed altogether unhurt. I ran forward some paces, shouting, 
then turned about. I was amazed. 

I had come right through them in vast flying 
strides, they were all behind me, and running 
hither and thither to hide. 

I felt an enormous astonishment at the 
evaporation of the great fight into which I had 
hurled myself, and not a little of exultation. 
It did not seem to me that I had discovered 
the Selenites were unexpectedly flimsy, but 
that I was unexpectedly strong. I laughed 
stupidly. This fantastic moon ! 

I glanced for a moment at the smashed and 
writhing bodies that were scattered over the 
cavern floor, with a vague idea of further 
violence, then hurried on after Cavor. 



XVIII 

IN THE SUNLIGHT 

Presently we saw that the cavern before us 

opened on a hazy void. In another moment 

we had emerged upon a sort of slanting gallery, 

that projected into a vast circular space, a huge 

cylindrical pit running vertically up and down. 

Round this pit the slanting gallery ran without 

any parapet or protection for a turn and a half, 

and then plunged high above into the rock 

again. Somehow it reminded me then of one 

of those spiral turns of the railway through the 

Saint Gothard. It was all tremendously huge. 

I can scarcely hope to convey to you the Titanic 

proportion of all that place, the Titanic effect 

of it. Our eyes followed up the vast declivity 

of the pit wall, and overhead and far above 

we beheld a round opening set witji faint stars, 

and half of the lip about it well-nigh blinding 

with the white light of the sun. At that we 

cried aloud simultaneously. 

" Come on ! " I said, leading the way. 
207 



2o8 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" But there ? " said Cavor, and very carefully 
stepped nearer the edge of the gallery. I 
followed his example, and craned forward and 
looked down, but I was dazzled by that gleam 
of light above, and I could see only a bottomless 
darkness with spectral patches of crimson and 
purple floating therein. Yet if I could not see, 
I could hear. Out of this darkness came a 
sound, a sound like the angry hum one can hear 
if one puts one's ear outside a hive of bees, a 
sound out of that enormous hollow, it may be, 
four miles beneath our feet. . . . 

For a moment I listened, then tightened my 
grip on my crowbar, and led the way up the 
gallery. 
 This must be the shaft we looked down 
upon," said Cavor. " Under that lid." 
' And below there, is where we saw the 
lights." 

"The lights!" said he. "Yes  the lights 
of the world that now we shall never see." 
' We'll come back," I said, for now we had 
escaped so much I was rashly sanguine that 
we should recover the sphere. 

His answer I did not catch. 

"Eh.?" I asked. 

" It doesn't matter," he answered, and we 
hurried on in silence. 



IN THE SUNLIGHT 209 

I suppose that slanting lateral way was four 
or five miles long, allowing for its curvature, 
and it ascended at a slope that would have 
made it almost impossibly steep on earth, but 
which one strode up easily under lunar conditions. We saw only two Selenites during 
all that portion of our flight, and directly they 
became aware of us they ran headlong. It 
was clear that the knowledge of our strength 
and violence had reached them. Our way to 
the exterior was unexpectedly plain. The 
spiral gallery straightened into a steeply ascendent tunnel, its floor bearing abundant traces 
of the mooncalves, and so straight and short 
In proportion to its vast arch, that no part of 
it was absolutely dark. Almost immediately 
it began to lighten, and then far off and high 
up, and quite blindingly brilliant, appeared 
its opening on the exterior, a slope of Alpine 
steepness surmounted by a crest of bayonet 
shrub, tall and broken down now, and dry and 
dead, in spiky silhouette against the sun. 

And It is strange that we men, to whom this 
very vegetation had seemed so weird and 
horrible a little time ago, should now behold 
it with the emotion a home-coming exile might 
feel at sight of his native land. We welcomed 
even the rareness of the air that made us pant 





2IO THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

as we ran, and which rendered speaking no 
longer the easy thing that it had been, but 
an effort to make oneself heard. Larger grew 
the sunlit circle above us, and larger, and all 
the nearer tunnel sank into a rim of indistinguishable black. We saw the dead bayonet 
shrub no longer with any touch of green in 
it, but brown and dry and thick, and the shadow 
of its upper branches high out of sight made 
a densely interlaced pattern upon the tumbled 
rocks. And at the immediate mouth of the 
tunnel was a wide trampled space where the 
mooncalves had come and gone. 

We came out upon this space at last into 
a light and heat that hit and pressed upon 
us. We traversed the exposed area painfully, and clambered up a slope among the 
scrub stems, and sat down at last panting in 
a high place beneath the shadow of a mass 
of twisted -lava. Even in the shade the rock 
felt hot. 

The air was intensely hot, and we were in 
great physical discomfort, but for all that we 
were no longer in a nightmare. We seemed 
to have come to our own province again, 
beneath the stars. All the fear and stress 
of our flight through the dim passages and 
fissures below had fallen from us. That last 



IN THE SUNLIGHT 211 

fight had filled us with an enormous confidence 
in ourselves so far as the Selenites were concerned. We looked back almost incredulously 
at the black opening from which we had just 
emerged. Down there it was, in a blue glow 
that now in our memories seemed the next 
thing to absolute darkness, we had met with 
things like mad mockeries of men, helmetheaded creatures, and had walked in fear before them, and had submitted to them until we 
could submit no longer. And, behold, they had 
smashed like wax and scattered like chaff, and 
fled and vanished like the creatures of a dream ! 

I rubbed my eyes, doubting whether we had 
not slept and dreamt these things by reason 
of the fungus we had eaten, and suddenly discovered the blood upon my face, and then that 
my shirt was sticking painfully to my shoulder 
and arm. 

" Confound it ! " I said, gauging my injuries 
with an investigatory hand, and suddenly that 
distant tunnel mouth became, as it were, a 
watching eye. 

"Cavor!" I said; "what are they going to 
do now ? And what are we going to do ? " 

He shook his head, with his eyes fixed upon 
the tunnel. "How can one tell what they 
will do,?" 



212 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" It depends on what they think of us, and 
I don't see how we can begin to guess that. 
And it depends upon what they have in reserve. It's as you say, Cavor, we have 
touched the merest outside of this world. 
They may have all sorts of things inside here. 
Even with those shooting things they might 
make it bad for us. . . . 
' Yet after all," I said, " even if we don I find 
the sphere at once, there is a chance for us. 
We might hold out. Even through the night. 
We might go down there again and make a 
fight for it." 

I stared about me with speculative eyes. 
The character of the scenery had altered altogether by reason of the enormous growth and 
subsequent drying of the scrub. The crest 
on which we sat was high, and commanded a 
wide prospect of the crater landscape, and we 
saw it now all sere and dry in the late autumn 
of the lunar afternoon. Rising one behind the 
other were long slopes and fields of trampled 
brown where the mooncalves had pastured, 
and far away in the full blaze of the sun a 
drove of them basked slumberously, scattered 
shapes, each with a blot of shadow against it 
like sheep on the side of a down. But never a 
sign of a Selenite was to be seen. Whether 



IN THE SUNLIGHT 213 

they had fled on our emergence from the 
interior passages, or whether they were accustomed to retire after driving out the mooncalves, I cannot guess. At the time I beUeved 
the former was the case. 
 If we were to set fire to all this stuff," I 
said, "we might find the sphere among the 
ashes." 

Cavor did not seem to hear me. He was 
peering under his hand at the stars, that still, 
in spite of the intense sunlight, were abundantly 
visible in the sky. " How long do you think we 
have been here ?" he asked at last. 

" Been where?" 

 On the moon." 
 Two earthly days, perhaps." 

" More nearly ten. Do you know, the sun 
is past its zenith, and sinking in the west. In 
four days' time or less it will be night." 
' But  we've only eaten once ! " 
' I know that. And  But there are the 
stars ! " 

 But why should time seem different because 
we are on a smaller planet ? " 
 I don't know. There it is ! " 

" How does one tell time ? " 

" Hunger  fatigue  all those things are 
different. Everything is different  every


214 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

thing. To me it seems that since first we 
came out of the sphere has been only a question of hours  long hours  at most." 

"Ten days," I said; "that leaves  " I 
looked up at the sun for a moment, and then 
saw that it was half-way from the zenith to the 
western edge of things. " Four days ! . . . 
Cavor, we mustn't sit here and dream. How 
do you think we may begin ? " 

I stood up.' We must get a fixed point 
we can recognise  we might hoist a flag, or a 
handkerchief, or something  and quarter the 
ground, and work round that." 

He stood up beside me. 

"Yes," he said, "there is nothing for it but 
to hunt the sphere. Nothing. We may find 
it  certainly we may find it. And if not " 

" We must keep on looking." 

He looked this way and that, glanced up at 
the sky and down at the tunnel, and astonished me by a sudden gesture of impatience. 
" Oh ! but we have done foolishly ! To have 
come to this pass ! Think how it might have 
been, and the things we might have done !  

" We may do something yet." 

" Never the thing we might have done. 
Here below our feet is a world. Think of 
what that world must be! Think of that 



IN THE SUNLIQHT 215 

machine we saw, and the hd and the shaft I 
They were just remote outlying things, and 
those creatures we have seen and fought with 
no more than ignorant peasants, dwellers in 
the outskirts, yokels and labourers half akin 
to brutes. Down below! Caverns beneath 
caverns, tunnels, structures, ways. ... It 
must open out, and be greater and wider and 
more populous as one descends. Assuredly. 
Right down at last to the central sea that 
washes round the core of the moon. Think 
of its inky waters under the spare lights  if, 
indeed, their eyes neei lights ! Think of the 
cascading tributaries pouring down their channels to feed it ! Think of the tides upon its 
surface, and the rush and swirl of its ebb and 
flow! Perhaps they have ships that go upon 
it, perhaps down there are mighty cities and 
swarming ways, and wisdom and order passing 
the wit of man. And we may die here upon 
it, and never see the masters who mus be  
ruling over these things ! We may freeze and 
die here, and the air will freeze and thaw upon 
us, and then  ! Then they will come upon us, 
come on our stiff and silent bodies, and find the 
sphere we cannot find, and they will understand at last too late all the thought and effort 
that ended here in vain ! " 



2i6 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

His voice for all that speech sounded like 
the voice of some one heard in a telephone, 
weak and far away. 

" But the darkness," I said. 

' One might get over that." 

"How.?" 
' I don't know. How am I to know? One 
might carry a torch, one might have a lamp  
The others  might understand." 

He stood for a moment with his hands held 
down and a rueful face, staring out over the 
waste that defied him. Then with a gesture 
of renunciation he turned towards me with 
proposals for the systematic hunting of the 
sphere. 

" We can return," I said. 

He looked about him. " First of all we 
shall have to get to earth." 

" We could bring back lamps to carry and 
climbing irons, and a hundred necessary 
thino-s." 
' Yes," he said. 

" We can take back an earnest of success 
in this gold." 

He looked at my golden crowbars, and said 
nothing for a space. He stood with his hands 
clasped behind his back, staring across the 
crater. At last he sighed and spoke. "It 



IN THE SUNLIGHT 217 

was  found the way here, but to find a way 
isn't always to be master of a way. If I take 
my secret back to earth, what will happen ? I 
do not see how I can keep my secret for a 
year, for even a part of a year. Sooner or 
later it must come out, even if other men 
rediscover it. And then. . . . Governments 
and powers will struggle to get hither, they 
will fight against one another, and against 
these moon people ; it will only spread warfare 
and multiply the occasions of war. In a little 
while, in a very little while, if I tell my secret, 
this planet to its 'deepest galleries will be 
strewn with human dead. Other thing's are 
doubtful, but that is certain. . . . It is not as 
though man had any use for the moon. What 
good would the moon be to men ? Even of 
their own planet what have they made but a 
battle-ground and theatre of infinite folly ? 
Small as his world is, and short as his time, 
he has still in his little life down there far more 
than he can do. No ! Science has toiled too 
long forging weapons for fools to use. It is 
time she held her hand. Let him find it out 
for himself again  in a thousand years' time." 

" There are methods of secrecy," I said. 

He looked up at me and smiled. " After 
all," he said, " why should one worry ? There 



2i8 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

is little chance of our finding the sphere, and 
down below things are brewing. It's simply 
the human habit of hoping till we die that 
makes us think of return. Our troubles are 
only beginning. We have shown these moon 
folk violence, we have given them a taste of 
our quality, and our chances are about as good 
as a tiger's that has got loose and killed a man 
in Hyde Park. The news of us must be 
running down from gallery to gallery, down 
towards the central parts. ... No sane 
beings will ever let us take that sphere back 
to earth after so much as they have seen 
of us." 

" We aren't improving our chances," said I, ' by sitting here." 

We stood up side by side. 

"After all," he said, "we must separate. 
We must stick up a handkerchief on these tall 
spikes here and fasten it firmly, and from this 
as a centre we must work over the crater. 
You must go westward, moving out in semicircles to and fro towards the setting sun. You 
must move first with your shadow on your right 
until it is at right angles with the direction of 
your handkerchief, and then with your shadow 
on your left. And I will do the same to the 
east. We will look into every gully, examine 



IN THE SUNLIGHT 219 

every skerry of rocks ; we will do all we can to 
find my sphere. If we see Selenites we will 
hide from them as well as we can. For drink 
we must take snow, and if we feel the need of 
food, we must kill a mooncalf if we can, and eat 
such flesh as it has  raw  and so each will go 
his own way." 

" And if one of us comes upon the sphere ? " 

" He must come back to the white handkerchief, and stand by it and signal to the other." 

" And if neither ? " 

Cavor glanced up at the sun. We go on 
seeking until the night and cold overtake us." 

" Suppose the Selenites have found the 
sphere and hidden it ? " 

He shrugged his shoulders. 

" Or if presently they come hunting us ? " 

He made no answer. 

"You had better take a club," I said. 

He shook his head, and stared away from 
me across the waste. 

But for a moment he did not start. He 
looked round at me shyly, hesitated. '' Au 
revoir' he said. 

I felt an odd stab of emotion. A sense of 
how we had galled each other, and particularly 
how I must have galled him, came to me. 
''Confound it," thought I, "we might have 



220 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

done better ! " I was on the point of asking 
him to shake hands  for that, somehow, was 
how I felt just then  when he put his feet 
together and leapt away from me towards the 
north. He seemed to drift through the air as 
a dead leaf would do, fell lightly, and leapt 
again. I stood for a moment watching him, 
then faced westward reluctantly, pulled myself 
together, and with something of the feeling of 
a man who leaps into icy water, selected a 
leaping point, and plunged forward to explore 
my solitary half of the moon world. I dropped 
rather clumsily among rocks, stood up and 
looked about me, clambered on to a rocky 
slab, and leapt again. . . . 

When presently I looked for Cavor he was 
hidden from my eyes, but the handkerchief 
showed out bravely on its headland, white in 
the blaze of the sun. 

I determined not to lose sight of that handkerchief whatever might betide. 



XIX 

MR. BEDFORD ALONE 

In a little while it seemed to me as though I 
had always been alone on the moon. I hunted 
for a time with a certain intentness, but the 
heat was still very great, and the thinness of 
the air felt like a hoop about one's chest. I 
came presently into a hollow basin bristling 
with tall, brown, dry fronds about its edge, and 
I sat down under these to rest and cool. I 
intended to rest for only a little while. I put 
down my clubs beside me, and sat resting my 
chin on my hands. I saw with a sort of colourless interest that the rocks of the basin, where 
here and there the crackling dry lichens had 
shrunk away to show them, were all veined 
and splattered with gold, that here and there 
bosses of rounded and wrinkled gold projected 
from among the litter. What did that matter 
now ? A sort of languor had possession of my 
limbs and mind, I did not believe for a moment 
that we should ever find the sphere in that vast 



2 22 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

desiccated wilderness. I seemed to lack a 
motive for effort until the Selenites should 
come. Then I supposed I should exert myself, obeying that unreasonable imperative that 
urges a man before all things to preserve and 
defend his life, albeit he may preserve it only to 
die more painfully in a little while. 
Why had we come to the moon . 
The thing presented itself to me as a perplexing problem. What is this spirit in man 
that urges him for ever to depart from happiness and security, to toil, to place himself in 
danger, to risk even a reasonable certainty of 
death? It dawned upon me up there in the 
moon as a thing I ought always to have known, 
that man is not made simply to go about being 
safe and comfortable and well fed and amused. 
Almost any man, if you put the thing to him, 
not in words, but in the shape of opportunities, 
will show that he knows as much. Against his 
interest, against his happiness, he is constantly 
being driven to do unreasonable things. Some 
force not himself impels him, and go he must. 
But why ? Why ? Sitting there in the midst 
of that useless moon gold, amidst the things 
of another world, I took count of all my life. 
Assuming I was to die a castaway upon the 
moon, I failed altogether to see what purpose 



MR. BEDFORD ALONE 223 

I had served. I got no light on that point, but 
at any rate it was clearer to me than it had ever 
been in my life before that I was not serving 
my own purpose, that all my life I had in truth 
never served the purposes of my private life. 
Whose purposes, what purposes, was I serving 
... I ceased to speculate on why we had come 
to the moon, and took a wider sweep. Why 
had I come to the earth ? Why had I a private 
life at all ? ... I lost myself at last in bottomless speculations. . . . 

My thoughts became vague and cloudy, no 
longer leading in definite directions. I had 
not felt heavy or weary  I cannot imagine 
one doing so upon the moon  but I suppose 
I was greatly fatigued. At any rate I slept. 

Slumbering there rested me gready, I think, 
and the sun was setting and the violence of the 
heat abating, through all the time I slumbered. 
When at last I was roused from my slumbers 
by a remote clamour, I felt active and capable 
again. I rubbed my eyes and stretched my 
arms. I rose to my feet  I was a little stiff  
and at once prepared to resume my search. 
I shouldered my golden clubs, one on each 
shoulder, and went on out of the ravine of 
the gold-veined rocks. 

The sun was certainly lower, much lower 



3 24 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

than it had been ; the air was very much cooler. 
I perceived I must have slept some time. It 
seemed to me that a faint touch of misty blueness hung about the western cliff. I leapt to 
a little boss of rock and surveyed the crater. 
I could see no signs of mooncalves or Selenites, 
nor could I see Cavor, but I could see my 
handkerchief afar off, spread out on its thicket 
of thorns. I looked about me, and then leapt 
forward to the next convenient view-point. 

I beat my way round in a semicircle, and 
back aofain in a still remoter crescent. It was 
very fatiguing and hopeless. The air was 
really very much cooler, and it seemed to me 
that the shadow under the westward cliff was 
growing broad. Ever and again I stopped 
and reconnoitred, but there was no sign of 
Cavor, no sign of Selenites ; and it seemed 
to me the mooncalves must have been driven 
into the interior again  I could see none of 
them. I became more and more desirous of 
seeing Cavor. The winged outline of the sun 
had sunk now, until it was scarcely the distance 
of its diameter from the rim of the sky. I 
was oppressed by the idea that the Selenites 
would presently close their lids and valves, 
and -shut us out under the inexorable onrush 
of the lunar night. It seemed to me high 



MR. BEDFORD ALONE 225 

time that he abandoned his search, and that 
we took counsel together. I feh how urgent 
it was that we should decide soon upon our 
course. We had failed to find the sphere, 
we no longer had time to seek it, and once 
these valves were closed with us outside, we 
were lost men. The great night of space 
would descend upon us  that blackness of the 
void which is the only absolute death. All 
my being shrank from that approach. We 
must get into the moon again, though we were 
slain in doing it. I was haunted by a vision 
of our freezing to death, of our hammering 
with our last strength on the valve of the 
great pit. 

I took no thought any more of the sphere. 
I thought only of finding Cavor again. I was 
half inclined to go back into the moon without 
him, rather than seek him until it was too late. 
I was already half-way back towards our handkerchief, when suddenly  

I saw the sphere ! 

I did not find it so much as it found me. 
It was lying much further to the westward 
than I had gone, and the sloping rays of the 
sinking sun reflected from its glass had suddenly proclaimed its presence in a dazzling 
beam. For an instant I thought this was 

p 



226 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

some new device of the Selenites against us, 
and then I understood. 

I threw up my arms, shouted a ghostly 
shout, and set off in vast leaps towards it. I 
missed one of my leaps and dropped into a 
deep ravine and twisted my ankle, and after 
that I stumbled at almost every leap. I was 
in a state of hysterical agitation, trembling 
violently, and quite breathless long before I 
got to it. Three times at least I had to stop 
with my hands resting on my side, and spite 
of the thin dryness of the air, the perspiration 
was wet upon my face. 

I thought of nothing but the sphere until 
I reached it, I forgot even my trouble of 
Cavor's whereabouts. My last leap flung me 
with my hands hard against its glass ; then I 
lay against it panting, and trying vainly to 
shout, ' Cavor ! here is the sphere ! " When 
I had recovered a little I peered through the 
thick glass, and the things inside seemed 
tumbled. I stooped to peer closer. Then I 
attempted to get in. I had to hoist it over 
a little to get my head through the manhole. 
The screw stopper was inside, and I could see 
now that nothing had been touched, nothing 
had suffered. It lay there as we had left it 
when we had dropped out amidst the snow. 



MR. BEDFORD ALONE 227 

For a time I was wholly occupied in making 
and remaking this inventory. I found I was 
trembling violently. It was good to see that 
familiar dark interior again ! I cannot tell you 
how good. Presently I crept inside and sat 
down among the things. I looked through 
the glass at the moon world and shivered. 
I placed my gold clubs upon the bale, and 
sought out and took a little food ; not so much 
because I wanted it, but because it was there. 
Then it occurred to me that it was time to go 
out and signal for Cavor. But I did not go 
out and signal for Cavor forthwith. Something 
held me to the sphere. 

After all, everything was coming right. 
There would be still time for us to get more 
of the magic stone that gives one mastery 
over men. Away there, close handy, was 
gold for the picking up ; and the sphere would 
travel as well half full of gold as though it were 
empty. We could go back now, masters of 
ourselves and our world, and then  

I roused myself at last, and with an effort 
got myself out of the sphere. I shivered as 
I emerged, for the evening air was growing 
very cold. I stood in the hollow staring about 
me. I scrutinised the bushes round me very 
carefully before I leapt to the rocky shelf hard 



228 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

by, and took once more what had been my 
first leap in the moon. But now I made it 
with no effort whatever. 

The growth and decay of the vegetation 
had gone on apace, and the whole aspect of 
the rocks had changed, but still it was possible 
to make out the slope on which the seeds had 
germinated, and the rocky mass from which 
we had taken our first view of the crater. But 
the spiky shrub on the slope stood brown and 
sere now, and thirty feet high, and cast long 
shadows that stretched out of sight, and the 
little seeds that clustered in its upper branches 
were brown and ripe. Its work was done, 
and it was brittle and ready to fall and crumple 
under the freezing air, so soon as the nightfall came. And the huge cacti, that had swollen 
as we watched them, had long since burst and 
scattered their spores to the four quarters of 
the moon. Amazinof little corner in the universe  the landing-place of men ! 

Some day, thought I, I will have an inscription standing there right in the midst of the 
hollow. It came to me, if only this teeming 
world within knew of the full import of the 
moment, how furious its tumult would become ! 

But as yet it could scarcely be dreaming 
of the significance of our coming. For if it 



MR. BEDFORD ALONE 229 

did, the crater would surely be an uproar 
of pursuit, instead of as still as death ! I 
looked about for some place from which I 
might signal to Cavor, and saw that same 
patch of rock to which he had leapt from my 
present standpoint, still bare and barren in the 
sun. For a moment I hesitated at going so 
far from the sphere. Then with a pang of 
shame at that hesitation, I leapt. . . . 

From this vantage point I surveyed the 
crater again. Far away at the top of the 
enormous shadow I cast was the little white 
handkerchief fluttering on the bushes. It was 
very little and very far, and Cavor was not 
in sight. It seemed to me that by this time 
he ought to be looking for me. That was the 
agreement. But he was nowhere to be seen. 

I stood waiting and watching, hands shading my eyes, expecting every moment to distinguish him. Very probably I stood there 
for quite a long time. I tried to shout, 
and was reminded of the thinness of the air. 
I made an undecided step back towards the 
sphere. But a lurking dread of the Selenites 
made me hesitate to signal my whereabouts 
by hoisting one of our sleeping-blankets on 
to the adjacent scrub. I searched the crater 
again. 



230 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

It had an effect of emptiness that chilled 
me. And it was still ! Any sound from the 
Selenites in the world beneath, even had 
died away. It was as still as death. Save 
for the faint stir of the shrub about me in 
the little breeze that was rising, there was 
no sound nor shadow of a sound. And the 
breeze blew chill. 

Confound Cavor ! 

I took a deep breath. I put my hands to 
the sides of my mouth. "Cavor!" I bawled, 
and the sound was like some manikin shouting 
far away. 

I looked at the handkerchief, I looked behind me at the broadening shadow of the westward cliff, I looked under my hand at the sun. 
It seemed to me that almost visibly it was 
creeping down the sky. 

I felt I must act instantly if I was to save 
Cavor. I whipped off my vest and flung it 
as a mark on the sere bayonets of the shrubs 
behind me, and then set off in a straight line 
towards the handkerchief. Perhaps it was a 
couple of miles away  a matter of a few hundred leaps and strides. I have already told 
how one seemed to hang through those lunar 
leaps. In each suspense I sought Cavor, and 
marvelled why he should be hidden. In each 



MR. BEDFORD ALONE 231 

leap I could feel the sun setting behind me. 
Each time I touched the ground I was tempted 
to go back. 

A last leap and I was in the depression 
below our handkerchief, a stride, and I stood on 
our former vantage point within arm's reach 
of it, I stood up straight and scanned the 
world about me, between its lengthening bars 
of shadow. Far away, down a long declivity, 
was the opening of the tunnel up which we 
had fled, and my shadow reached towards it, 
stretched towards it, and touched it, like a 
finger of the night. 

Not a sign of Cavor, not a sound in all the 
stillness, only that the stir and waving of the 
scrub and of the shadows increased. And 

suddenly and violently I shivered. " Cav " 

I began, and realised once more the uselessness of the human voice in that thin air. 
Silence. The silence of death. 
Then it was my eye caught something  
a little thing, lying perhaps fifty yards away 
down the slope, amidst a litter of bent and 
broken branches. What was it.? I knew, 
and yet for some reason I would not know. 
I went nearer to it. It was the little cricketcap Cavor had worn. I did not touch it, I 
stood looking at it. 



232 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

I saw then that the scattered branches about 
it had been forcibly smashed and trampled. 
I hesitated, stepped forward and picked it up. 

I stood with Caver's cap in my hand, staring 
at the trampled reeds and thorns about me. 
On some of them were little smears of something dark, something that I dared not touch. 
A dozen yards away, perhaps, the rising breeze 
dragged something into view, something small 
and vividly white. 

It was a little piece of paper crumpled tightly, 
as though it had been clutched tightly. I 
picked it up, and on it were smears of red. 
My eye caught faint pencil marks. I smoothed 
it out, and saw uneven and broken writing ending at last in a crooked streak upon the paper. 

I set myself to decipher this. 
 I haVe been injured about the knee, I 
think my kneecap is hurt, and I cannot run 
or crawl," it began  pretty distinctly written. 

Then less legibly: "They have been chasing me for some time, and it is only a question 
of"  the word " time " seemed to have been 
written here and erased in favour of something 
illegible  " before they get me. They are 
beating all about me." 

Then the writing became convulsive. " I 
can hear them," I guessed the tracing meant, 



MR. BEDFORD ALONE 233 

and then it was quite unreadable for a space. 
Then came a little string of words that were 
quite distinct : " a different sort of Selenite 
altogether, who appears to be directing the  " 
The writing became a mere hasty confusion 
again. 

" They have larger brain cases  much larger, 
and slenderer bodies, and very short legs. They 
make gentle noises, and move with organised 
deliberation ... 

 And though I am wounded and helpless 
here, their appearance still gives me hope  " 
That was like Cavor. " They have not shot 
at me or attempted . . . injury. I intend " 

Then came the sudden streak of the pencil 
across the paper, and on the back and edges 
blood ! 

And as I stood there stupid and perplexed, 
with this dumbfounding relic in my hand, something very soft and light and chill touched 
my hand for a moment and ceased to be, and 
then a thing, a little white speck, drifted athwart 
a shadow. It was a tiny snowflake, the first 
snowflake, the herald of the night. 

I looked up with a start, and the sky had 
darkened now almost to blackness, and was thick 
with a gathering multitude of coldly watchful 
stars. I looked eastward, and the light of that 



234 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

shrivelled world was touched with a sombre 
bronze ; westward, and the sun, robbed now by 
a thickening white mist of half its heat and 
splendour, was touching the crater rim, was 
sinking out of sight, and all the shrubs and 
jagged and tumbled rocks stood out against 
it in a bristling disorder of black shapes. Into 
the great lake of darkness westward, a vast 
wreath of mist was sinking. A cold wind set 
all the crater shivering. Suddenly, for a 
moment, I was in a puff of falling snow, and 
all the world about me grey and dim. 

And then it was I heard, not loud and penetrating as at first, but faint and dim like a 
dying voice, that tolling, that same tolling 
that had welcomed the coming of the day : 
Boom ! . . . Boom ! . . . Boom ! . . . 

It echoed about the crater, it seemed to 
throb with the throbbing of the greater stars, 
the blood-red crescent of the sun's disk sank 
as it tolled out : Boom ! . . . Boom ! . . . 
Boom ! 

What had happened to Cavor ? All through 
that tolling I stood there stupidly, and at last 
the tolling ceased. 

And suddenly the open mouth of the tunnel 
down below there, shut like an eye and vanished 
out of sight. 



MR. BEDFORD ALONE 235 

Then indeed was I alone. 

Over me, around me, closing in on me, embracing me ever nearer, was the Eternal ; that 
which was before the beginning, and that which 
triumphs over the end ; that enormous void in 
which all light and life and being is but the 
thin and vanishing splendour of a falling star, 
the cold, the stillness, the silence  the infinite 
and final Night of space. 

The sense of solitude and desolation became 
the sense of an overwhelming presence that 
stooped towards me, that almost touched me. 
No," I cried. ''No Not yet! not yet! 
Wait ! Wait ! Oh wait ! " My voice went up 
to a shriek. I flung the crumpled paper from 
me, scrambled back to the crest to take my 
bearings, and then, with all the will that was 
in me, leapt out towards the mark I had left, 
dim and distant now in the very margin of the 
shadow. 

Leap, leap, leap, and each leap was seven ages. 

Before me the pale serpent-girdled section 
of the sun sank and sank, and the advancing 
shadow swept to seize the sphere before I could 
reach it. I was two miles away, a hundred 
leaps or more, and the air about me was thinning out as it thins under an air-pump, and the 
cold was gripping at my joints. But had I 



236 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

died, I should have died leaping. Once, and 
then again my foot slipped on the gathering 
inow as I leapt and shortened my leap ; once I 
fell short into bushes that crashed and smashed 
into dusty chips and nothingness, and once I 
stumbled as I dropped, and rolled head over 
heels into a gully, and rose bruised and bleeding 
and confused as to my direction. 

But such incidents were as nothing to the 
intervals, those awful pauses when one drifted 
through the air towards that pouring tide of 
night. My breathing made a piping noise, 
and it was as though knives were whirling in 
my lungs. My heart seemed to beat against 
the top of my brain. " Shall I reach it . 

Heaven ! shall I reach it ? " 
My whole being became anguish. 

" Lie down ! " screamed my pain and despair ; 
" lie down !" 

The nearer I struggled, the more awfully 
remote it seemed. I was numb, I stumbled, 

1 bruised and cut myself and did not bleed. 

It was in sight. 

I fell on all fours, and my lungs whooped. 

I crawled. The frost gathered on my lips, 
icicles hung from my moustache, I was white 
with the freezing atmosphere. 

I was a dozen yards from it. My eyes had 




The nearer I strusrsled, the more awfully remote it seemed ' 



MR. BEDFORD ALONE 237 

become dim. " Lie down ! " screamed despair ; 
"lie down!" 

I touched it, and halted. " Too late ! " 
screamed despair ; "lie down ! " 

I fought stiffly with it. I was on the manhole lip, a stupefied, half-dead being. The 
snow was all about me. I pulled myself in. 
There lurked within a little warmer air. 

The snowflakes  the airflakes  danced in 
about me, as I tried with chilling hands to 
thrust the valve in and spun it tight and hard. 
I sobbed. I will," I chattered in my teeth. 
And then, with fingers that quivered and felt 
brittle, I turned to the shutter studs. 

As I fumbled with the switches  for I had 
never controlled them before  I could see 
dimly through the steaming glass the blazing 
red streamers of the sinking sun, dancing and 
flickering through the snowstorm, and the 
black forms of the scrub thickening and bending and breaking beneath the accumulating 
snow. Thicker whirled the snow and thicker, 
black against the light. What if even now the 
switches overcame me ? 

Then something clicked under my hands, and 
in an instant that last vision of the moon world 
was hidden from my eyes. I was in the silence 
and darkness of the inter-planetary sphere. 



XX 

MR. BEDFORD IN INFINITE SPACE 

It was almost as though I had been killed. 
Indeed, I could imagine a man suddenly and 
violently killed would feel very much as I did. 
One moment, a passion of agonising existence 
and fear; the next, darkness and stillness, 
neither light nor life nor sun, moon nor stars, 
the blank infinite. Although the thing was 
done by my own act, although I had already 
tasted this very effect in Cavor's company, I 
felt astonished, dumbfounded, and overwhelmed. 
I seemed to be borne upward into an enormous darkness. My fingers floated off the 
studs, I hung as if I were annihilated, and at 
last very softly and gently I came against the 
bale and the golden chain, and the crowbars 
that had drifted to the middle of the sphere. 

I do not know how long that drifting took. 
In the sphere of course, even more than on the 
moon, one's earthly time sense was ineffectual. 

At the touch of the bale it was as if I had 

338 



MR. BEDFORD IN INFINITE SPACE 239 

awakened from a dreamless sleep. I immediately perceived that if I wanted to keep 
awake and alive I must get a light or open a 
window, so as to get a grip of something with 
my eyes. And besides I was cold. I kicked 
off from the bale, therefore, clawed on to the 
thin cords within the glass, crawled along until 
I got to the manhole rim, and so got my bearings for the light and blind studs, took a shove 
off, and flying once round the bale, and getting 
a scare from something big and flimsy that 
was drifting loose, I got my hand on the cord 
quite close to the studs, and reached them. I 
lit the little lamp first of all to see what it was 
I had collided with, and discovered that old 
copy of Lloyd's News had slipped its moorings, and was adrift in the void. That brought 
me out of the infinite to my own proper dimensions again. It made me laugh and pant for a 
time, and suggested the idea of a little oxygen 
from one of the cylinders. After that I lit the 
heater until I felt warm, and then I took food. 
Then I set to work in a very gingerly fashion 
on the Cavorite blinds, to see if I could guess 
by any means how the sphere was travelling. 

The first blind I opened I shut at once, and 
hung for a time flattened and blinded by the 
sunlight that had hit me. After thinking a 



240 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

little I started upon the windows at right angles 
to this one, and got the huge crescent moon 
and the little crescent earth behind it, the 
second time. I was amazed to find how far I 
was from the moon. I had reckoned that not 
only should I have little or none of the " kickoff" that the earth's atmosphere had given us 
at our start, but that the tangential "fly off" of 
the moon's spin would be at least twenty-eight 
times less than the earth's. I had expected to 
discover myself hanging over our crater, and 
on the edge of the night, but all that was nowonly a part of the outline of the white crescent 
that filled the sky. And Cavor ? 

He was already infinitesimal. 

I tried to imagine what could have happened 
to him. But at that time I could think of 
nothing but death. I seemed to see him, bent 
and smashed at the foot of some interminably 
high cascade of blue. And all about him the 
stupid insects stared. . . . 

Under the inspiring touch of the drifting 
newspaper I became practical again for a while. 
It was quite clear to me that what I had to do 
was to get back to earth, but as far as I could 
see I was drifting away from it. Whatever 
had happened to Cavor, even if he was still 
alive, which seemed to me incredible after that 



MR. BEDFORD IN INFINITE SPACE 241 

blood-stained scrap, I was powerless to help him. 
There he was, living or dead behind the mantle 
of that rayless night, and there he must remain 
at least until I could summon our fellow-men to 
his assistance. Should I do that ? Something 
of the sort I had in my mind ; to come back to 
earth if it were possible, and then as maturer 
consideration might determine, either to show 
and explain the sphere to a few discreet persons, and act with them, or else to keep my 
secret, sell my gold, obtain weapons, provisions, 
and an assistant, and return with these advantages to deal on equal terms with the flimsy 
people of the moon, to rescue Cavor, if that 
were still possible, and at any rate to procure 
a sufficient supply of gold to place my subsequent proceedings on a firmer basis. But that 
was hoping far, I had first to get back. 

I set myself to decide just exactly how the 
return to earth could be contrived. As I struggled with that problem I ceased to worry about 
what I should do when I got there. At last 
my only care was to get back. 

I puzzled out at last that my best chance 
would be to drop back towards the moon as 
near as I dared in order to gather velocity, 
then to shut my windows and fly behind it, 
and when I was past to open my earthward 

Q 



242 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

windows, and so get off at a good pace homeward. But whether I should ever reach the 
earth by that device, or whether I might not 
simply find myself spinning about it in some 
hyperbolic or parabolic curve or other, I could 
not tell. Later I had a happy inspiration, and 
by opening certain windows to the moon, 
which had appeared in the sky in front of the 
earth, I turned my course aside so as to head 
off the earth, which it had become evident to 
me I must pass behind without some such 
expedient. I did a very great deal of complicated thinking over these problems  for I am 
no mathematician  and in the end I am certain it was much more my good luck than my 
reasoning that enabled me to hit the earth. 
Had I known then, as I know now, the mathematical chances there were against me, I doubt 
if I should have troubled even to touch the 
studs to make any attempt. And having 
puzzled out what I considered to be the thing 
to do, I opened all my moonward windows, 
and squatted down  the effort lifted me for a 
time some feet or so into the air, and I hung 
there in the oddest way  and waited for the 
crescent to get bigger and bigger until I felt I 
was near enough for safety. Then I would 
shut the windows, fly past the moon with the 



MR. BEDFORD IN INFINITE SPACE 243 

velocity I had got from it  if I did not smash 
upon it  and so go on towards the earth. 

And that is what I did. 

At last I felt my moonward start was sufficient. I shut out the sight of the moon from 
my eyes, and in a state of mind that was, I 
now recall, incredibly free from anxiety or any 
distressful quality, I sat down to begin a vigil 
in that little speck of matter in infinite space 
that would last until I should strike the earth. 
The heater had made the sphere tolerably 
warm, the air had been refreshed by the 
oxygen, and except for that faint congestion 
of the head that was always with me while I 
was away from earth, I felt entire physical 
comfort. I had extinguished the light again, 
lest it should fail me in the end ; I was in 
darkness, save for the earthshine and the 
glitter of the stars below me. Everything was 
so absolutely silent and still that I might indeed have been the only being in the universe, 
and yet, strangely enough, I had no more feeling of loneliness or fear than if I had been 
lying in bed on earth. Now, this seems all the 
stranger to me, since during my last hours in 
that crater of the moon, the sense of my utter 
loneliness had been an agony. . . . 

Incredible as it will seem, this interval of 



244 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

time that I spent in space has no sort of proportion to any other interval of time in my life. 
Sometimes it seemed as though I sat through 
immeasurable eternities like some god upon a 
lotus leaf, and again as though there was a 
momentary pause as I leapt from moon to 
earth. In truth, it was altogether some weeks 
of earthly time. But I had done with care and 
anxiety, hunger or fear, for that space. I floated, 
thinking with a strange breadth and freedom of 
all that we had undergone, and of all my life 
and motives, and the secret issues of my being. 
I seemed to myself to have grown greater 
and greater, to have lost all sense of movement ; to be floating amidst the stars, and 
always the sense of earth's littleness and the 
infinite littleness of my life upon it, was implicit in my thoughts. 

I can't profess to explain the things that 
happened in my mind. No doubt they could 
all be traced directly or indirectly to the curious 
physical conditions under which I was living. 
I set them down here just for what they are 
worth, and without any comment. The most 
prominent quality of it was a pervading doubt 
of my own identity. I became, if I may so 
express it, dissociate from Bedford ; I looked 
down on Bedford as a trivial, incidental thing 



MR. BEDFORD IN INFINITE SPACE 245 
with which I chanced to be connected. I saw 
Bedford in many relations as an ass or as a 
poor beast, where I had hitherto been inch'ned 
to regard him with a quiet pride as a very 
spirited or rather forcible person. I saw him 
not only as an ass, but as the son of many 
generations of asses. I reviewed his schooldays and his early manhood, and his first 
encounter with love, very much as one might 
review the proceedings of an ant in the sand. 
. . . Something of that period of lucidity I 
regret still hangs about me, and I doubt if I 
shall ever recover the full-bodied self-satisfaction of my early days. But at the time the 
thing was not in the least painful, because I 
had that extraordinary persuasion that, as a 
matter of fact, I was no more Bedford than I 
was any one else, but only a mind floating in 
the still serenity of space. Why should I be 
disturbed about this Bedford's shortcomings.? 
I was not responsible for him or them. 

For a time I struggled against this really 
very grotesque delusion. I tried to summon 
the memory of vivid moments, of tender or 
intense emotions to my assistance ; I felt that 
if I could recall one genuine twinge of feeling 
the growing severance would be stopped. But 
I could not do it. I saw Bedford rushing down 



246 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

Chancery Lane, hat on the back of his head, 
coat tails flying out, en route for his public 
examination. I saw him dodging and bumping against, and even saluting, other similar 
little creatures in that swarming gutter! of 
people. Me? I saw Bedford that same 
evening in the sitting-room of a certain lady, 
and his hat was on the table beside him, and 
it wanted brushing badly, and he was in tears. 
Me. I saw him with that lady in various 
attitudes and emotions  I never felt so detached before. ... I saw him hurrying off to 
Lympne to write a play, and accosting Cavor, 
and in his shirt sleeves working at the sphere, 
and walking out to Canterbury because he was 
afraid to come ! Me ? I did not believe it. 

I still reasoned that all this was hallucination 
due to my solitude, and the fact that I had lost 
all weight and sense of resistance. I endeavoured to recover that sense by banging myself 
about the sphere, by pinching my hands and 
clasping them together. Among other things 
I lit the light, captured that torn copy of Lloyd' Sy 
and read those convincingly realistic advertisements again about the Cutaway bicycle, and the 
gentleman of private means, and the lady in 
distress who was selling those " forks and 
spoons." There was no doubt they existed 



MR. BEDFORD IN INFINITE SPACE 247 

surely enough, and, said I, " This is your 
world, and you are Bedford, and you are 
going back to live among things like that for 
all the rest of your life." But the doubts within 
me could still argue : " It is not you that is 
reading, it is Bedford, but you are not Bedford, you know. That's just where the mistake 
comes in." 
' Confound it ! " I cried ;  and if I am not 
Bedford, what am I .- " 

But in that direction no light was forthcoming, though the strangest fancies came drifting 
into my brain, queer remote suspicions, like 
shadows seen from far away. . . . Do you 
know, I had a sort of idea that really I was 
something quite outside not only the world, 
but all worlds, and out of space and time, and 
that this poor Bedford was just a peephole 
through which I looked at life ? . . . 

Bedford ! However I disavowed him, there 
I was most certainly bound up with him, and I 
knew that wherever or whatever I might be, I 
must needs feel the stress of his desires, and 
sympathise with all his joys and sorrows until 
his life should end. And with the dying of 
Bedford  what then ? . . . 

Enough of this remarkable phase of my 
experiences ! I tell it here simply to show 



248 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

how one's isolation and departure from this 
planet touched not only the functions and 
feeling of every organ of the body, but indeed also the very fabric of the mind, with 
strange and unanticipated disturbances. All 
through the major portion of that vast space 
journey I hung thinking of such immaterial 
things as these, hung dissociated and apathetic, 
a cloudy megalo-maniac, as it were, amidst the 
stars and planets in the void of space ; and not 
only the world to which I was returning, but 
the blue-lit caverns of the Selenites, their helmet 
faces, their gigantic and wonderful machines, 
and the fate of Cavor, dragged helpless into 
that world, seemed infinitely minute and altogether trivial things to me. 

Until at last I began to feel the pull of the 
earth upon my being, drawing me back again 
to the life that is real for men. And then, indeed, it grew clearer and clearer to me that 
I was quite certainly Bedford after all, and 
returning after amazing adventures to this 
world of ours, and with a life that I was very 
likely to lose in this return. I set myself to 
puzzle out the conditions under which I must 
fall to earth. 



XXI 

MR. BEDFORD AT LITTLESTONE 

My line of flight was about parallel with the 
surface as I came into the upper air. The 
temperature of the sphere began to rise forthwith. I knew it behoved me to drop at once. 
Far below me, in a darkling twilight, stretched 
a great expanse of sea. I opened every window I could, and fell  out of sunshine into 
evening, and out of evening into night. Vaster 
grew the earth and vaster, swallowing up the 
stars, and the silvery translucent starlit veil of 
cloud it wore spread out to catch me. At last 
the world seemed no longer a sphere but flat, 
and then concave. It was no longer a planet in 
the sky, but the world of Man. I shut all but an 
inch or so of earthward window, and dropped 
with a slackening velocity. The broadening 
water, now so near that I could see the dark 
glitter of the waves, rushed up to meet me. 
The sphere became very hot. I snapped the 
last strip of window, and sat scowling and biting 

my knuckles, waiting for the impact. . . . 

249 



250 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

The sphere hit the water with a huge 
splash : it must have sent it fathoms high. 
At the splash I flung the Cavorite shutters 
open. Down I went, but slower and slower, 
and then I felt the sphere pressing against 
my feet, and so drove up again as a bubble 
drives. And at the last I was floating and 
rocking upon the surface of the sea, and my 
journey in space was at an end. 

The night was dark and overcast. Two 
yellow pin-points far away showed the passing 
of a ship, and nearer was a red glare that 
came and went. Had not the electricity of 
my glow-lamp exhausted itself, I could have 
got picked up that night. In spite of the inordinate fatigue I was beginning to feel, I was 
excited now, and for a time hopeful, in a 
feverish, impatient way, that so my travelling 
might end. 

But at last I ceased to move about, and sat, 
wrists on knees, staring at' a distant red light. 
It swayed up and down, rocking, rocking. My 
excitement passed. I realised I had yet to 
spend another night at least in the sphere. I 
perceived myself infinitely heavy and fatigued. 
And so I fell asleep. 

A change in my rhythmic motion awakened 
me. I peered through the refracting glass. 



MR. BEDFORD AT LITTLESTONE 251 

and saw that I had come aground upon a huge 
shallow of sand. Far away I seemed to see 
houses and trees, and seaward a curved, vague 
distortion of a ship hung between sea and sky. 

I stood up and staggered. My one desire 
was to emerge. The manhole was upward, and 
I wrestled with the screw. Slowly I opened 
the manhole. At last the air was singing in 
again as once it had sung out. But this time 
I did not wait until the pressure was adjusted. 
In another moment I had the weight of the 
window on my hands, and I was open, wide 
open, to the old familiar sky of earth. 

The air hit me on the chest so that I gasped. 
I dropped the glass screw. I cried out, put 
my hands to my chest, and sat down. For 
a time I was in pain. Then I took deep 
breaths. At last I could rise and move about 
again. 

I tried to thrust my head through the manhole, and the sphere rolled over. It was as 
though something had lugged my head down 
directly it emerged. I ducked back sharply, 
or I should have been pinned face under water. 
After some wriggling and shoving I managed 
to crawl out upon sand, over which the retreating waves still came and went. 

I did not attempt to stand up. It seemed 



252 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

to me that my body must be suddenly changed 
to lead. Mother Earth had her grip on me 
now  no Cavorite intervening. I sat down 
heedless of the water that came over my feet. 

It was dawn, a grey dawn, rather overcast, 
but showing here and there a long patch of 
greenish grey. Some way out a ship was 
lying at anchor, a pale silhouette of a ship with 
one yellow light. The water came rippling in 
in long shallow waves. Away to the right 
curved the land, a shingle bank with little 
hovels, and at last a lighthouse, a sailing mark 
and a point. Inland stretched a space of level 
sand, broken here and there by pools of water, 
and ending a mile away perhaps in a low shore 
of scrub. To the north-east some isolated 
watering-place was visible, a row of gaunt 
lodging-houses, the tallest things that I could 
see on earth, dull dabs against the brightening 
sky. What strange men can have reared these 
vertical piles in such an amplitude of space I 
do not know. There they are, like pieces of 
Brighton lost in the waste. 

For a long time I sat there, yawning and 
rubbing my face. At last I struggled to rise. 
It made me feel that I was lifting a weight. 
I stood up. 

I stared at the distant houses. For the first 



MR. BEDFORD AT LITTLESTONE 253 

time since our starvation in the crater I thought 
of earthly food. " Bacon," I whispered, "eggs. 
Good toast and good coffee. . . . And how 
the devil am I going to get all this stuff to 
Lympne ? " I wondered where I was. It was 
an east shore anyhow, and I had seen Europe 
before I dropped. 

I heard footsteps scrunching in the sand, 
and a little round-faced, friendly-looking man 
in flannels, with a bathing towel wrapped about 
his shoulders, and his bathing dress over his 
arm, appeared up the beach. I knew instantly 
that I must be in England. He was staring 
almost intently at the sphere and me. He advanced staring. I daresay I looked a ferocious 
savage enough  dirty, unkempt, to an indescribable degree ; but it did not occur to me at 
the time. He stopped at a distance of twenty 
yards. " Hul-lo, my man ! " he said doubtfully. 

" Hullo yourself! " said I. 

He advanced, reassured by that. " What on 
earth is that thing ? " he asked. 

" Can you tell me where I am ? " I asked. 

"That's Littlestone," he said, pointing to 
the houses ; '' and that's Dungeness ! Have 
you just landed ? What's that thing you've 
got ? Some sort of machine ? " 

" Yes." 



254 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

"Have you floated ashore? Have you 
been wrecked or something? What is it?" 

I meditated swiftly. I made an estimate of 
the little man's appearance as he drew nearer. 
"By Jove!" he said, "you've had a time of 
it ! I thought you  Well  Where were 
you cast away? Is that thing a sort of floating thing for saving life ? " 

I decided to take that line for the present. 
I made a few vague affirmatives. " I want 
help," I said hoarsely.' I want to get some 
stuff up the beach  stuff I can't very well leave 
about." I became aware of three other pleasant-looking young men with towels, blazers, 
and straw hats, coming down the sands towards 
me. Evidently the early bathing section of 
this Littlestone! 

"Help!" said the young man; "rather!" 
He became vaguely active. " What particularly do you want done ? " He turned round 
and gesticulated. The three young men accelerated their pace. In a minute they were 
about me, plying me with questions I was 
indisposed to answer. " I'll tell all that later," 
I said. " I'm dead beat. I'm a rag." 

" Come up to the hotel," said the foremost 
little man. " We'll look after that thing 
there." 



MR. BEDFORD AT LITTLESTONE 255 

I hesitated. " I can t," I said. " In that 
sphere there's two big bars of gold." 

They looked incredulously at one another, 
then at me with a new inquiry. I went to the 
sphere, stooped, crept in, and presently they 
had the Selenites' crowbars and the broken 
chain before them. If I had not been so 
horribly fagged I could have laughed at 
them. It was like kittens round a beetle. 
They didn't know what to do with the stuff. 
The fat little man stooped and lifted the end of 
one of the bars, and then dropped it with a 
grunt. Then they all did. 

"It's lead, or gold ! " said one. 

"Oh, \i's gold!" said another. 

"Gold, right enough," said the third. 

Then they all stared at me, and then they 
all stared at the ship lying at anchor. 

" I say ! " cried the little man. " But where 
did you get that ? " 

I was too tired to keep up a lie. " I got it 
in the moon." 

I saw them stare at one another. 

"Look here!" said I, "I'm not going to 
argue now. Help me carry these lumps of gold 
up to the hotel  I guess, with rests, two of you 
can manage one, and I'll trail this chain thing  
and I'll tell you more when I've had some food." 



256 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" And how about that thing ? " 

" It won't hurt there," I said. " Anyhow  
confound it!  it must stop there now. If the 
tide comes up, it will float all right." 

And in a state of enormous wonderment, 
these young men most obediently hoisted my 
treasures on their shoulders, and with limbs 
that felt like lead I headed a sort of procession 
towards that distant fraoment of " sea-front." 
Half-way there we were reinforced by two awestricken little girls with spades, and later a lean 
little boy, with a penetrating sniff, appeared. 
He was, I remember, wheeling a bicycle, and 
he accompanied us at a distance of about a 
hundred yards on our right flank, and then, I 
suppose, gave us up as uninteresting, mounted 
his bicycle, and rode off over the level sands 
in the direction of the sphere. 

I glanced back after him. 

 He won't touch it," said the stout young 
man reassuringly, and I was only too willing 
to be reassured. 

At first something of the grey of the morning was in my mind, but presently the sun 
disenofaofed itself from the level clouds of the 
horizon and lit the world, and turned the leaden 
sea to glittering waters. My spirits rose. A 
sense of the vast importance of the things I 



MR, BEDFORD AT LITTLESTONE 257 

had done and had yet to do came with the 
sunlight into my mind. I laughed aloud as 
the foremost man staggered under my gold. 
When indeed I took my place in the world, 
how amazed the world would be ! 

If it had not been for my inordinate fatigue, 
the landlord of the Littlestone hotel would have 
been amusing, as he hesitated between my 
gold and my respectable company on the one 
hand, and my filthy appearance on the other. 
But at last I found myself in a terrestrial bathroom once more with warm water to wash 
myself with, and a change of raiment, preposterously small indeed, but anyhow clean, that 
the genial little man had lent me. He lent 
me a razor too, but I could not screw up 
my resolution to attack even the outposts of 
the bristling beard that covered my face. 

I sat down to an English breakfast and ate 
with a sort of languid appetite  an appetite 
many weeks old, and very decrepit  and stirred 
myself to answer the questions of the four 
young men. And I told them the truth. 

"Well," said I, "as you press me  I got it 
In the moon." 

" The moon." 

" Yes, the moon in the sky." 

" But how do you mean ? " 



2S8 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" What I say, confound it ! " 

"That you have just come from the 
moon ? " 

"Exactly! through space  in that ball," 
And I took a delicious mouthful of egg. I 
made a private note that when I went back 
to the moon I would take a box of eggs. 

I could see clearly that they did not believe 
one word of what I told them, but evidently 
they considered me the most respectable liar 
they had ever met. They glanced at one 
another, and then concentrated the fire of their 
eyes on me. I fancy they expected a clue to 
me in the way I helped myself to salt. They 
seemed to find something significant in my 
peppering my egg. These strangely shaped 
masses of gold they had staggered under held 
their minds. There the lumps lay in front of 
me, each worth thousands of pounds, and as 
impossible for any one to steal as a house or a 
piece of land. As I looked at their curious 
faces over my coffee-cup, I realised something 
of the enormous wilderness of explanations 
into which I should have to wander to render 
myself comprehensible again. 

"You don't really mean  " began the 
youngest young man, in the tone of one who 
speaks to an obstinate child. 



MR. BEDFORD AT LITTLESTONE 259 

"Just pass me that toast-rack," I said, and 
shut him up completely. 

" But look here, I say," began one of the 
others. "We're not going to believe that, 
you know." 

"Ah, well," said I, and shrugged my 
shoulders. 

" He doesn't want to tell us," said the 
youngest young man in a stage aside ; and 
then, with an appearance of great sang-froid, 
"You don't mind if I take a cigarette?" 

I waved him a cordial assent, and proceeded 
with my breakfast. Two of the others went 
and looked out of the farther window and 
talked inaudibly. I was struck by a thought. 
"The tide," I said, "is running out." 

There was a pause, a doubt who should 
answer me. " It's near the ebb," said the 
'fat little man. 

"Well, anyhow," I said, "it won't float far." 

I decapitated my third g'g and began a 
little speech. " Look here," I said. " Please 
don't imagine I'm surly or telling you uncivil 
lies, or anything of that sort. I'm forced 
almost, to be a little short and mysterious. 
I can quite understand this is as queer as 
it can be, and that your imaginations must 
be going it. I can assure you, you're in at 



26o THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

a memorable time. But I can't make it clear 
to you now  it's impossible. I give you my 
word of honour I've come from the moon, and 
that's all I can tell you. . . . All the same I'm 
tremendously obliged to you, you know, tremendously. I hope that my manner hasn't in 
any way given you offence." 

" Oh, not in the least ! " said the youngest 
young man affably.' We can quite understand," and staring hard at me all the time, 
he heeled his chair back until it very nearly 
upset, and recovered with some exertion. 
" Not a bit of it," said the fat young man. 
"Don't you imagine thatV and they all got 
up and dispersed, and walked about and lit 
cigarettes, and generally tried to show they 
were perfectly amiable and disengaged, and 
entirely free from the slightest curiosity about 
me and the sphere. "I'm going to keep 
an eye on that ship out there all the same," I 
heard one of them remarking in an undertone. 
If only they could have forced themselves to 
it, they would, I believe, even have gone out 
and left me. I went on with my third g. 

"The weather," the fat little man remarked 
presently, "has been immense, has it not? 
I don't know when we have had such a 
summer. ..." 



MR. BEDFORD AT LITTLESTONE 261 

Phoo  whizz ! Like a tremendous rocket ! 

And somewhere a window was broken. . . . 

" What's that ? " said I. 

"It isn't  ?" cried the little man, and 
rushed to the corner window. 

All the others rushed to the window likewise. I sat staring at them. 

Suddenly I leapt up, knocked over my third 
egg, and rushed for the window also. I had 
just thought of something. " Nothing to be 
seen there," cried the little man, rushing for 
the door. 
 It's that boy ! " I cried, bawling in hoarse 
fury ; " it's that accursed boy ! " and turning 
about I pushed the waiter aside  he was just 
bringing me some more toast  and rushed 
violently out of the room and down and out 
upon the queer little esplanade in front of the 
hotel. 

The sea, which had been smooth, was rough 
now with hurrying cat's-paws, and all about 
where the sphere had been was tumbled water 
like the wake of a ship. Above, a little puff 
of cloud whirled like dispersing smoke, and the 
three or four people on the beach were staring 
up with interrogative faces towards the point 
of that unexpected report. And that was all ! 
Boots and waiter and the four young men in 



262 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

blazers came rushing out behind me. Shouts 
came from windows and doors, and all sorts 
of worrying people came into eight  agape. 

For a time I stood there, too overwhelmed 
by this new development to think of the people. 

At first I was too stunned to see the thing 
as any definite disaster  I was just stunned, 
as a man is by some accidental violent blow. 
It is only afterwards he begins to appreciate 
his specific injury. 

" Good Lord ! " 

I felt as though somebody was pouring funk 
out of a can down the back of my neck. My 
legs became feeble. I had got the first intimation of what the disaster meant for me. There 
was that confounded boy  sky high ! I was 
utterly "left." There was the gold in the 
coffee-room  my only possession on earth. 
How would it all work out? The general effect 
was of a gigantic unmanageable confusion. 

" I say," said the voice of the little man 
behind.' I say, you know." 

I wheeled about, and there were twenty or 
thirty people, a sort of irregular investment 
of people, all bombarding me with dumb interrogation, with infinite doubt and suspicion. 
I felt the compulsion of their eyes intolerably. 
I groaned aloud. 



MR. BEDFORD AT LITTLESTONE 263 

"I carHtl'' I shouted. " I tell you I can't! 
I'm not equal to it ! You must puzzle and  
and be damned to you ! " 

I gesticulated convulsively. He receded a 
step as though I had threatened him. I made 
a bolt through them into the hotel. I charged 
back into the coffee-room, rang the bell furiously. I gripped the waiter as he entered. 
" D'ye hear ? " I shouted.  Get help and carry 
these bars up to my room right away." 

He failed to understand me, and I shouted 
and raved at him. A scared-looking little old 
man in a green apron appeared, and further 
two of the young men in flannels. I made a 
dash at them and commandeered their services. As soon as the gold was in my room 
I felt free to quarrel. " Now get out," I 
shouted; "all of you get out if you don't 
want to see a man go mad before your eyes ! " 
And I helped the waiter by the shoulder as 
he hesitated in the doorway. And then, as 
soon as I had the door locked on them all, 
I tore off the little man's clothes again, shied 
them right and left, and got into bed forthwith. 
And there I lay swearing and panting and 
cooling for a very long time. 

At last I was calm enough to get out of bed 
and ring up the round-eyed waiter for a flannel 



264 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

nightshirt, a soda and whisky, and some good 
cigars. And these things being procured me, 
after an exasperating delay that drove me 
several times to the bell, I locked the door 
again and proceeded very deliberately to look 
the entire situation in the face. 

The net result of the great experiment presented itself as an absolute failure. It was a 
rout, and I was the sole survivor. It was an 
absolute collapse, and this was the final disaster. There was nothing for it but to save 
myself, and as much as I could in the way 
of prospects from our ddbdcle. At one fatal 
crowning blow all my vague resolutions of 
return and recovery had vanished. My intention of going back to the moon, of getting 
a sphereful of gold, and afterwards of having 
a fragment of Cavorite analysed and so recovering the great secret  perhaps, finally, even 
of recovering Cavor's body  all these ideas 
vanished altogether. 

I was the sole survivor, and that was all. 

I think that going to bed was one of the 
luckiest ideas I have ever had in an emergency. I really believe I should either have 
got loose-headed or done some fatal, indiscreet 
thing. But there, locked in and secure from 



MR. BEDFORD AT LITTLESTONE 265 

all interruption, I could think out the position 
in all its bearings and make my arrangements 
at leisure. 

Of course it was quite clear to me what had 
happened to the boy. He had crawled into 
the sphere, meddled with the studs, shut the 
Cavorite windows, and gone up. It was highly 
improbable he had screwed in the manhole 
stopper, and, even if he had, the chances were 
a thousand to one against his getting back. It 
was fairly evident that he would gravitate with 
my bales to somewhere near the middle of the 
sphere and remain there, and so cease to be a 
legitimate terrestrial interest, however remarkable he mio-ht seem to the inhabitants of some 
remote quarter of space. I very speedily convinced myself on that point. And as for any 
responsibility I might have in the matter, the 
more I reflected upon that, the clearer it became that if only I kept quiet about things, I 
need not trouble myself about that. If I was 
faced by sorrowing parents demanding their 
lost boy, I had merely to demand my lost 
sphere or ask them what they meant. At first 
I had had a vision of weeping parents and 
guardians, and all sorts of complications ; but 
now I saw that I simply had to keep my mouth 
shut, and nothing in that way could arise. 



266 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

And, indeed, the more I lay and smoked and 
thought, the more evident became the wisdom 
of impenetrability. 

It is within the right of every British citizen, 
provided he does not commit damage nor, indecorum, to appear suddenly wherever he 
pleases, and as ragged and filthy as he pleases, 
and with whatever amount of virgin gold he 
sees fit to encumber himself, and no one has 
any right at all to hinder and detain him in 
this procedure. I formulated that at last to 
myself, and repeated it over as a sort of private 
Magna Charta of my liberty. 

Once I had put that issue on one side, I 
could take up and consider in an equable 
manner certain considerations I had scarcely 
dared to think of before, namely, those arising 
out of the circumstances of my bankruptcy. 
But now, looking at this matter calmly and at 
leisure, I could see that if only I suppressed 
my identity by a temporary assumption of 
some less well-known name, and if I retained 
the two months' beard that had grown upon 
me, the risks of any annoyance from the spiteful creditor to whom I have already alluded 
became very small indeed. From that to a 
definite course of rational worldly action was 
plain sailing. It was all amazingly petty, no 



MR. BEDFORD AT LITTLESTONE 267 

doubt, but what was there remaining for me 
to do? 

Whatever I did I was resolved that I would 
keep myself level and right side up. 

I ordered up writing materials, and addressed 
a letter to the New Romney Bank  the nearest, 
the waiter informed me  telling the manager I 
wished to open an account with him, and requesting him to send two trustworthy persons 
properly authenticated in a cab with a good 
horse to fetch some hundredweight of gold 
with which I happened to be encumbered. I 
signed the letter Blake," which seemed to me 
to be a thoroughly respectable sort of name. 
This done, I got a Folkestone Blue Book, 
picked out an outfitter, and asked him to send 
a cutter to measure me for a drab tweed suit, 
ordering at the same time a valise, dressing 
bag, brown boots, shirts, hats (to fit), and so 
forth ; and from a watchmaker I also ordered a 
watch. And these letters being despatched, I 
had up as good a lunch as the hotel could give, 
and then lay smoking a cigar, as calm and 
ordinary as possible, until in accordance with 
my instructions two duly authenticated clerks 
came from the bank and weighed and took 
away my gold. After which I pulled the 
clothes over my ears in order to drown any 



268 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

knocking, and went very comfortably to 
sleep. 

I went to sleep. No doubt it was a prosaic 
thing for the first man back from the moon to 
do, and I can imagine that the young and 
imaginative reader will find my behaviour disappointing. But I was horribly fatigued and 
bothered, and, confound it ! what else was 
there to do ? There certainly was not the 
remotest chance of my being believed, if I had 
told my story then, and it would certainly have 
subjected me to intolerable annoyances. I 
went to sleep. When at last I woke up again 
I was ready to face the world, as I have always 
been accustomed to face it since I came to 
years of discretion. And so I got away to 
Italy, and there it is I am writing this story. 
If the world will not have it as fact, then the 
world may take it as fiction. It is no concern 
of mine. 

And now that the account is finished, I am 
amazed to think how completely this adventure is gone and done with. Everybody believes that Cavor was a not very brilliant 
scientific experimenter who blew up his house 
and himself at Lympne, and they explain the 
bang that followed my arrival at Littlestone by 
a reference to the experiments with explosives 



MR. BEDFORD AT LITTLESTONE 269 

that are going on continually at the government establishment of Lydd, two miles away. 
I must confess that hitherto I have not acknowledged my share in the disappearance 
of Master Tommy Simmons, which was that 
little boy's name. That, perhaps, may prove a 
difficult item of corroboration to explain away. 
They account for my appearance in rags with 
two bars of indisputable gold upon the Littlestone beach in various ingenious ways  it 
doesn't worry me what they think of me. 
They say I have strung all these things together to avoid being questioned too closely 
as to the source of my wealth. I would like 
to see the man who could invent a story that 
would hold together like this one. Well, they 
must take it as fiction  there it is. 

I have told my story  and now I suppose I 
have to take up the worries of this terrestrial 
life again. Even if one has been to the moon, 
one has still to earn a living. So I am working here at Amalfi, on the scenario of that play 
I sketched before Cavor came walking into my 
world, and I am trying to piece my life together 
as it was before ever I saw him. I must confess 
that I find it hard to keep my mind on the play 
when the moonshine comes into my room. It 
is full moon here, and last night I was out on 



2 70 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

the pergola for hours, staring away at that 
shining blankness that hides so much. Imagine it ! tables and chairs, and trestles and 
bars of gold ! Confound it !  if only one could 
hit on that Cavorite again ! But a thing like 
that doesn't come twice in a life. Here I am, 
a little better off than I was at Lympne, and 
that is all. And Cavor has committed suicide 
in a more elaborate way than any human being 
ever did before. So the story closes as finally 
and completely as a dream. It fits in so little 
with all the other things of life, so much of it 
is so utterly remote from all human experience, 
the leaping, the eating, the breathing, and these 
weightless times, that indeed there are moments 
when, in spite of my moon gold, I do more 
than half believe myself that the whole thing 
was a dream. . . . 



XXII 

THE ASTONISHING COMMUNICATION OF MR. 
JULIUS WENDIGEE 

When I had finished my account of my return 
to the earth at Littlestone I wrote, " The End," 
made a flourish, and threw my pen aside, fully 
believing that the whole story of the First Men 
in the Moon was done. Not only had I done 
this, but I had placed my manuscript in the 
hands of a literary agent, had permitted it to be 
sold, had seen the greater portion of it appear 
in the Strand Magazine, and was setting to 
work again upon the scenario of the play I had 
commenced at Lympne before I realised that 
the end was not yet. And then, following me 
from Amalfi to Algiers, there reached me (it is 
now about six months ago) one of the most 
astounding communications I have ever been 
fated to receive. Briefly, it informed me that 
Mr. Julius Wendigee, a Dutch electrician, who 
has been experimenting with certain apparatus 
akin to the apparatus used by Mr. Tesla in 



272 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

America, in the hope of discovering some 
method of communication with Mars, was receiving day by day a curiously fragmentary 
message in English, which was indisputably 
emanating from Mr. Cavor in the moon. 

At first I thought the thing was an elaborate 
practical joke by some one who had seen the 
manuscript of my narrative. I answered Mr. 
Wendigee jestingly, but he replied in a manner 
that put such suspicion altogether aside, and in 
a state of inconceivable excitement I hurried 
from Algiers to the little observatory upon the 
St. Gothard in which he was working. In 
the presence of his record and his appliances  
and above all of the messages from Cavor 
that were coming to hand  my lingering doubts 
vanished. I decided at once to accept a proposal he made me to remain with him, assisting 
him to take down the record from day to day, 
and endeavouring with him to send a message 
back to the moon. Cavor, we learnt, was not 
only alive but free, in the midst of an almost 
inconceivable community of these ant -like 
beings, these ant-men, in the blue darkness 
of the lunar caves. He was lamed, it seemed, 
but otherwise in quite good health  in better 
health, he distinctly said, than he usually enjoyed on earth. He had had a fever, but it 



THE ASTONISHING COMMUNICATION 273 

had left no bad effects. But curiously enough 
he seemed to be labouring under a conviction 
that I was either dead in the moon crater or 
lost in the deep of space. 

His message began to be received by Mr. 
Wendigee when that gentleman was engaged 
in quite a different investigation. The reader 
will no doubt recall the little excitement that 
began the century, arising out of an announcement by Mr. Nikola Tesla, the American 
electrical celebrity, that he had received a 
message from Mars. His announcement renewed attention to a fact that had long been 
familiar to scientific people, namely : that from 
some unknown source in space, waves of electro-magnetic disturbance, entirely similar to 
those used by Signer Marconi for his wireless 
telegraphy, are constantly reaching the earth. 
Besides Mr. Tesla quite a number of other 
observers have been engaged in perfecting 
apparatus for receiving and recording these 
vibrations, though few would go so far as to 
consider them actual messages from some extraterrestrial sender. Among that few, however, 
we must certainly count Mr. Wendigee. Ever 
since 1898 he had devoted himself almost entirely to this subject, and being a man of ample 
means he had erected an observatory on the 

S 



2 74 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

flanks of Monte Rosa, in a position singularlyadapted in every way for such observations. 

My scientific attainments, I must admit, are 
not great, but so far as they enable me to 
judge, Mr. Wendigee's contrivances for detecting and recording any disturbances in the 
electro-magnetic conditions of space are singularly original and ingenious. And by a happy 
combination of circumstances they were set up 
and in operation about two months before 
Cavor made his first attempt to call up the 
earth. Consequently we have fragments of 
his communication even from the beginning. 
Unhappily, they are only fragments, and the 
most momentous of all the things that he had 
to tell humanity  the instructions, that is, for 
the making of Cavorite, if, indeed, he ever 
transmitted them  have throbbed themselves 
away unrecorded into space. We never succeeded in getting a response back to Cavor. 
He was unable to tell, therefore, what we had 
received or what we had missed ; nor, indeed, 
did he certainly know that any one on earth 
was really aware of his efforts to reach us. 
And the persistence he displayed in sending 
eighteen long descriptions of lunar affairs  as 
they would be if we had them complete  shows 
how much his mind must have turned back 



THE ASTONISHING COMMUNICATION 275 

towards his native planet since he left it two 
years ago. 

You can imagine how amazed Mr. Wendigee 
must have been when he discovered his record 
of electro-magnetic disturbances interlaced by 
Cavor's straightforward English. Mr. Wendigee knew nothing of our wild journey moonward, and suddenly  this English out of the 
void! 

It is well the reader should understand the 
conditions under which it would seem these 
messages were sent. Somewhere within the 
moon Cavor certainly had access for a time to 
a considerable amount of electrical apparatus, 
and it would seem he rigged up  perhaps 
furtively  a transmitting arrangement of the 
Marconi type. This he was able to operate 
at irregular intervals : sometimes for only halfan-hour or so, sometimes for three or four 
hours at a stretch. At these times he transmitted his earthward message, regardless of 
the fact that the relative position of the moon 
and points upon the earth's surface is constantly altering. As a consequence of this and 
of the necessary imperfections of our recording 
instruments his communication comes and goes 
in our records in an extremely fitful manner ; it 
becomes blurred ; it " fades out " in a mys


276 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

terlous and altogether exasperating way. And 
added to this is the fact that he was not an 
expert operator ; he had partly forgotten, or 
never completely mastered, the code in general 
use, and as he became fatigued he dropped 
words and misspelt in a curious manner. 

Altogether we have probably lost quite half 
of the communications he made, and much we 
have is damaged, broken, and partly effaced. 
In the abstract that follows the reader must be 
prepared therefore for a considerable amount 
of break, hiatus, and change of topic. Mr. 
Wendig'ee and I are collaboratinof in a complete and annotated edition of the Cavor 
record, which we hope to publish, together 
with a detailed account of the instruments 
employed, beginning with the first volume in 
January next. That will be the full and scientific report, of which this is only the popular 
first transcript. But here we give at least 
sufficient to complete the story I have told, 
and to give the broad outlines of the state of 
that other world so near, so akin, and yet so 
dissimilar to our own. 



XXIII 

AN ABSTRACT OF THE SIX MESSAGES FIRST 
RECEIVED FROM MR. CAVOR 

The two earlier messages of Mr. Cavor may 
very well be reserved for that larger volume. 
They simply tell, with greater brevity and with 
a difference in several details that is interesting, 
but not of any vital importance, the bare facts 
of the making of the sphere and our departure 
from the world. Throughout, Cavor speaks of 
me as a man who is dead, but with a curious 
change of temper as he approaches our landing 
on the moon. " Poor Bedford," he says of me, 
and "this poor young man"; and he blames 
himself for inducing a young man, "by no 
means well equipped for such adventures," to 
leave a planet "on which he was indisputably 
fitted to succeed " on so precarious a mission. 
I think he underrates the part my energy and 
practical capacity played in bringing about the 
realisation of his theoretical sphere. "We 
arrived," he says, with no more account of our 



277 



278 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

passage through space than if we had made a 
journey of common occurrence in a railway train. 

And then he becomes increasingly unfair to 
me. Unfair, indeed, to an extent I should not 
have expected in a man trained in the search 
for truth. Looking back over my previously 
written account of these things, I must insist 
that I have been altogether juster to Cavor 
than he has been to me. I have extenuated little and suppressed nothing. But his 
account is :  

"It speedily became apparent that the entire 
strangeness of our circumstances and surroundings  great loss of weight, attenuated but 
highly oxygenated air, consequent exaggeration of the results of muscular effort, rapid 
development of weird plants from obscure 
spores, lurid sky  was exciting my companion 
unduly. On the moon his character seemed 
to deteriorate. He became impulsive, rash, 
and quarrelsome. In a little while his folly 
in devouring some gigantic vesicles and his 
consequent intoxication led to our capture 
by the Selenites  before we had had the 
slightest opportunity of properly observing 
their ways. . , ." 

(He says, you observe, nothing of his own 
concession to these same " vesicles.") 



ABSTRACT OF THE SIX MESSAGES 279 

And he goes on from that point to say that 
"We came to a difficult passage with them, 
and Bedford mistaking certain gestures of 
theirs"  pretty gestures they were!  "gave 
way to a panic violence. He ran amuck, 
killed three, and perforce I had to flee with 
him after the outrage. Subsequently we 
fought with a number who endeavoured to 
bar our way, and slew seven or eight more. 
It says much for the tolerance of these beings 
that on my recapture I was not instantly slain. 
We made our way to the exterior and separated in the crater of our arrival, to increase 
our chances of recovering our sphere. But 
presently I came upon a body of Selenites, led 
by two who were curiously different, even in 
form, from any of those we had seen hitherto, 
with larger heads and smaller bodies, and 
much more elaborately wrapped about. And 
after evading them for some time I fell into 
a crevasse, cut my head rather badly and 
displaced my patella, and, finding crawling 
very painful, decided to surrender  if they 
would still permit me to do so. This they 
did, and, perceiving my helpless condition, 
carried me with them again into the moon. 
And of Bedford I have heard or seen nothing 
more, nor, so far as I can gather, has any 



28o THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

Selenite. Either the night overtook him in 
the crater, or else, which is more probable, 
he found the sphere, and, desiring to steal a 
march upon me, made off with it  only, I fear, 
to find it uncontrollable, and to meet a more 
lingering fate in outer space." 

And with that Cavor dismisses me and goes 
on to more interesting topics. I dislike the 
idea of seeming to use my position as his editor 
to deflect his story in my own interest, but 
I am obliged to protest here against the turn 
he gives these occurrences. He says nothing 
about that gasping message on the bloodstained paper in which he told, or attempted 
to tell, a very different story. The dignified 
self-surrender is an altogether new view of the 
affair that has come to him, I must insist, since 
he began to feel secure among the lunar people ; 
and as for the " stealing a march " conception, 
I am quite willing to let the reader decide between us on what he has before him. I know 
I am not a model man  I have made no 
pretence to be. But am I tia f 

However, that is the sum of my wrongs. 
From this point I can edit Cavor with an 
untroubled mind, for he mentions me no 
more. 

It would seem the Selenites who had come 



ABSTRACT OF THE SIX MESSAGES 281 

upon him carried him to some point in the 
interior down "a great shaft" by means of 
what he describes as "a sort of balloon." We 
gather from the rather confused passage in 
which he describes this, and from a number of 
chance allusions and hints in other and subsequent messages, that this " great shaft " is one 
of an enormous system of artificial shafts that 
run, each from what is called a lunar " crater," 
downwards for very nearly a hundred miles 
towards the central portion of our satellite. 
These shafts communicate by transverse tunnels, they throw out abysmal caverns and 
expand into great globular places ; the whole 
of the moon's substance for a hundred miles 
inward, indeed, is a mere sponge of rock. 
"Partly," says Cavor, "this sponginess is 
natural, but very largely it is due to the enormous industry of the Selenites in the past. 
The enormous circular mounds of the excavated rock and earth it is that form these great 
circles about the tunnels known to earthly 
astronomers (misled by a false analogy) as 
volcanoes." 

It was down this shaft they took him, in 
this "sort of balloon" he speaks of, at first 
into an inky blackness and then into a region of continually increasing phosphorescence. 



282 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

Cavor's despatches show him to be curiously 
regardless of detail for a scientific man, but 
we gather that this light was due to the 
streams and cascades of water  "no doubt 
containing some phosphorescent organism " 
 that flowed ever more abundantly downward towards the Central Sea. And as he 
descended, he says, "The Selenites also became luminous." And at last far below him 
he saw, as it were, a lake of heatless fire, the 
waters of the Central Sea, glowing and eddying in strange perturbation, "like luminous 
blue milk that is just on the boil." 

" This Lunar Sea," says Cavor, in a later 
passage, " is not a stagnant ocean ; a solar tide 
sends it in a perpetual flow around the lunar 
axis, and strange storms and boilings and rushings of its waters occur, and at times cold winds 
and thunderings that ascend out of it into the 
busy ways of the great ant-hill above. It is 
only when the water is in motion that it gives 
out lisfht ; in its rare seasons of calm it is black. 
Commonly, when one sees it, its waters rise and 
fall in an oily swell, and flakes and big rafts of 
shining, bubbly foam drift with the sluggish, 
faintly glowing current. The Selenites navigate 
its cavernous straits and lagoons in little shallow 
boats of a canoe-like shape ; and even before 



ABSTRACT OF THE SIX MESSAGES 283 

my journey to the galleries about the Grand 
Lunar, who is Master of the Moon, I was permitted to make a brief excursion on its waters. 

"The caverns and passages are naturally very 
tortuous. A large proportion of these ways are 
known only to expert pilots among the fishermen, and not infrequently Selenites are lost for 
ever in their labyrinths. In their remoter recesses, I am told, strange creatures lurk, some 
of them terrible and dangerous creatures that 
all the science of the moon has been unable to 
exterminate. There is particularly the Rapha, 
an inextricable mass of clutching tentacles 'that 
one hacks to pieces only to multiply ; and the 
Tzee, a darting creature that is never seen, so 
subtly and suddenly does it slay. ..." 

He gives us a gleam of description. 

" I was reminded on this excursion of what I 
have read of the Mammoth Caves ; if only I had 
had a yellow flambeau instead of the pervading 
blue light, and a solid-looking boatman with an 
oar instead of a scuttle-faced Selenite working 
an engine at the back of the canoe, I could have 
imagined I had suddenly got back to earth. 
The rocks about us were very various, sometimes black, sometimes pale blue and veined, 
and once they flashed and glittered as though 
we had come into a mine of sapphires. And 



284 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

below one saw the ghostly phosphorescent 
fishes flash and vanish in the hardly less phosphorescent deep. Then, presently, a long ultramarine vista down the turgid stream of one of 
the channels of traffic, and a landing-stage, 
and then, perhaps, a glimpse up the enormous 
crowded shaft of one of the vertical ways. 

"In one great place heavy with glistening 
stalactites a number of boats were fishing. We 
went alongside one of these and watched the 
long-armed fishing Selenites winding in a net. 
They were little, hunchbacked insects, with very 
strong arms, short, bandy legs, and crinkled 
face-masks. As they pulled at it that net 
seemed the heaviest thing I had come upon 
in the moon ; it was loaded with weights  no 
doubt of gold  and it took a long time to draw, 
for in those waters the larger and more edible 
fish lurk deep. The fish in the net came up 
like a blue moonrise  a blaze of darting, tossing 
blue. 

" Among their catch was a many-tentaculate, 
evil-eyed black thing, ferociously active, whose 
appearance they greeted with shrieks and twitters, and which with quick, nervous movements 
they hacked to pieces by means of little hatchets. 
All its dissevered limbs continued to lash and 
writhe in a vicious manner. Afterwards, when 



ABSTRACT OF THE SIX MESSAGES 285 

fever had hold of me, I dreamt again and again 
of that bitter, furious creature rising so vigorous 
and active out of the unknown sea. It was the 
most active and malignant thing of all the living 
creatures I have yet seen in this world inside 
the moon. . . . 
' The surface of this sea must be very nearly 
two hundred miles (if not more) below the level 
of the moon's exterior ; all the cities of the moon 
lie, I learnt, immediately above this Central Sea, 
in such cavernous spaces and artificial galleries 
as I have described, and they communicate with 
the exterior by enormous vertical shafts which 
open invariably in what are called by earthly 
astronomers the ' craters ' of the moon. The 
lid covering one such aperture I had already 
seen during the wanderings that had preceded 
my capture. 

" Upon the condition of the less central 
portion of the moon I have not yet arrived 
at very precise knowledge. There is an enormous system of caverns in which the mooncalves shelter during the night ; and there are 
abattoirs and the like  in one of these it was 
that I and Bedford fought with the Selenite 
butchers  and I have since seen balloons laden 
with meat descending out of the upper dark. 



286 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

I have as yet scarcely learnt as much of these 
things as a Zulu in London would learn about 
the British corn supplies in the same time. It 
is clear, however, that these vertical shafts and 
the vegetation of the surface must play an 
essential role in ventilating and keeping fresh 
the atmosphere of the moon. At one time, 
and particularly on my first emergence from 
my prison, there was certainly a cold wind 
blowing down the shaft, and later there was 
a kind of sirocco upward that corresponded 
with my fever. For' at the end of about three 
weeks I fell ill of an indefinable sort of fever, 
and in spite of sleep and the quinine tabloids 
that very fortunately I had brought in my 
pocket, I remained ill and fretting miserably, 
almost to the time when I was taken into the 
presence of the Grand Lunar, who is Master of 
the Moon. 
 I will not dilate on the wretchedness of 
my condition," he remarks, "during those days 
of ill-health." And he goes on with great 
amplitude with details I omit here. " My 
temperature," he concludes, "kept abnormally 
high for a long time, and I lost all desire 
for food. I had stagnant waking intervals, 
and sleep tormented by dreams, and at one 
phase I was, I remember, so weak as to be 



ABSTRACT OF THE SIX MESSAGES 287 

earth-sick and almost hysterical. I longed 
almost intolerably for colour to break the 
everlasting blue. . . ." 

He reverts again presently to the topic of 
this sponge caught lunar atmosphere. I am 
told by astronomers and physicists that all he 
tells is in absolute accordance with what was 
already known of the moon's condition. Had 
earthly astronomers had the courage and 
imagination to push home a bold induction, 
says Mr. Wendigee, they might have foretold 
almost everything that Cavor has to say of 
the general structure of the moon. They 
know now pretty certainly that moon and 
earth are not so much satellite and primary 
as smaller and greater sisters, made out of 
one mass, and consequently made of the 
same material. And since the density of the 
moon is only three-fifths that of the earth, 
there can be nothing for it but that she is 
hollowed out by a great system of caverns. 
There was no necessity, said Sir Jabez Flap, 
F.R.S., that most entertaining exponent of 
the facetious side of the stars, that we should 
ever have gone to the moon to find out such 
easy inferences, and points the pun with an 
allusion to Gruyere, but he certainly might 
have announced his knowledge of the hollow


288 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

ness of the moon before. And If the moon 
is hollow, then the apparent absence of air 
and water is, of course, quite easily explained. 
The sea lies within at the bottom of the 
caverns, and the air travels through the great 
sponge of galleries, in accordance with simple 
physical laws. The caverns of the moon, on 
the whole, are very windy places. As the 
sunlight comes round the moon the air in 
the outer galleries on that side is heated, its 
pressure increases, some flows out on the 
exterior and mingles with the evaporating air 
of the craters (where the plants remove its 
carbonic acid), while the greater portion flows 
round through the galleries to replace the 
shrinking air of the cooling side that the sunlight has left. There is, therefore, a constant 
eastward breeze in the air of the outer galleries, 
and an up-flow during the lunar day up the 
shafts, complicated, of course, very greatly by 
the varying shape of the galleries, and the ingenious contrivances of the Selenite mind. . . . 



XXIV 

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SELENITES 

The messages of Cavor from the sixth up to 
the sixteenth are for the most part so much 
broken, and they abound so in repetitions, that 
they scarcely form a consecutive narrative. 
They will be given in full, of course, in the 
scientific report, but here it will be far more 
convenient to continue simply to abstract and 
quote as in the former chapter. We have 
subjected every word to a keen critical scrutiny, 
and my own brief memories and impressions 
of lunar things have been of inestimable help 
in interpreting what would otherwise have been 
impenetrably dark. And, naturally, as living 
beings our interest centres far more upon the 
strange community of lunar insects in which he 
was living, it would seem, as an honoured guest 
than upon the mere physical condition oi their 
world. 

I have already made it clear, I think, that 

the Selenites I saw resembled man in main
289  



290 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

taining the erect attitude, and in having four 
limbs, and I have compared the general appearance of their heads and the jointing of 
their limbs to that of insects. I have mentioned, too, the peculiar consequence of the 
smaller gravitation of the moon on their fragile 
slightness. Cavor confirms me upon all these 
points. He calls them "animals," though of 
course they fall under no division of the classification of earthly creatures, and he points out 
"the insect type of anatomy had, fortunately 
for men, never exceeded a relatively very small 
size on earth." The largest terrestrial insects, 
living or extinct, do not, as a matter of fact, 
measure 6 in. in length ; but here, against 
the lesser gravitation of the moon, a creature 
certainly as much an insect as vertebrate seems 
to have been able to attain to human and 
ultrahuman dimensions." 

He does not mention the ant, but throughout his allusions the ant is continually being 
brought before my mind, in its sleepless 
activity, in its intelligence and social organisation, in its structure, and more particularly 
in the fact that it displays, in addition to the 
two forms, the male and the female form, that 
almost all other animals possess, a number of 
other sexless creatures, workers, soldiers, and 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 291 

the like, differing from one another in structure, character, power, and use, and yet all 
members of the same species. For these 
Selenites, also, have a great variety of forms. 
Of course they are not only colossally greater 
in size than ants, but also, in Cavor's opinion 
at least, in intelligence, morality, and social 
wisdom are they colossally greater than men. 
And instead of the four or five different 
forms of ant that are found, there are almost 
innumerably different forms of Selenite. I 
have endeavoured to indicate the very considerable difference observable in such Selenites of the outer crust as I happened to 
encounter ; the differences in size and proportions were certainly as wide as the differences 
between the most widely separated races of 
men. But such differences as I saw fade absolutely to nothing in comparison with the huge 
distinctions of which Cavor tells. It would 
seem the exterior Selenites I saw were, indeed, 
mostly engaged in kindred occupations  mooncalf herds, butchers, fleshers, and the like. 
But within the moon, practically unsuspected 
by me, there are, it seems, a number of other 
sorts of Selenite, differing in size, differing in 
the relative size of part to part, differing in 
power and appearance, and yet not different 



292 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

species of creatures, but only different forms 
of one species, and retaining through all their 
variations a certain common likeness that 
marks their specific unity. ' The moon is, 
indeed, a sort of vast ant-hill, only, instead of 
there being only four or five sorts of ant, 
there are many hundred different sorts of 
Selenite, and almost every gradation between 
one sort and another. 

It would seem the discovery came upon 
Cavor very speedily. I infer rather than learn 
from his narrative that he was captured by the 
mooncalf herds under the direction of those 
other Selenites who "have larger brain cases 
(heads ?) and very much shorter legs." Finding he would not walk even under the goad, 
they carried him into darkness, crossed a 
narrow, plank-like bridge that may have been 
the identical bridge I had refused, and put 
him down in something that must have seemed 
at first to be some sort of lift. This was the 
balloon  it had certainly been absolutely invisible to us in the darkness  and what had 
seemed to me a mere plank-walking into the 
void was really, no doubt, the passage of the 
gangway. In this he descended towards constantly more luminous caverns of the moon. 
At first they descended in silence  save for 




" They carried him into darkness ' 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 293 

the twitterings of the Selenites  and then into 
a stir of windy movement. In a Httle while 
the profound blackness had made his eyes so 
sensitive that he began to see more and more 
of the things about him, and at last the vague 
took shape. 

"Conceive an enormous cylindrical space," 
says Cavor in his seventh message, "a quarter 
of a mile across, perhaps ; very dimly lit at 
first and then brighter, with big platforms twisting down its sides in a spiral that vanishes at 
last below in a blue profundity ; and lit even 
more brightly  one could not tell how or why. 
Think of the well of the very largest spiral 
staircase or lift-shaft that you have ever looked 
down, and magnify that by a hundred. Imagine it at twilight seen through blue glass. 
Imagine yourself looking down that ; only 
imagine also that you feel extraordinarily light, 
and have got rid of any giddy feeling you 
might have on earth, and you will have the 
first conditions of my impression. Round this 
enormous shaft imagine a broad gallery running in a much steeper spiral than would be 
credible on earth, and forming a steep road 
protected from the gulf only by a little parapet 
that vanishes at last in perspective a couple of 
miles below. 



294 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" Looking up, I saw the very fellow of the 
downward vision ; it had, of course, the effect 
of looking into a very steep cone. A wind 
was blowing down the shaft, and far above 
I fancy I heard, growing fainter and fainter, 
the bellowing of the mooncalves that were 
being driven down again from their evening pasturage on the exterior. And up and 
down the spiral galleries were scattered numerous moon people, pallid, faintly self-luminous 
beings, regarding our appearance or busied 
on unknown errands. 
 Either I fancied it or a flake of snow 
came drifting down on the icy breeze. And 
then, falling like a snowflake, a little figure, 
a little man-insect clinging to a parachute, 
drove down very swiftly towards the central 
places of the moon. 

"The big-headed Selenite sitting beside 
me, seeing me move my head with the gesture of one who saw, pointed with his trunklike hand 'and indicated a sort of jetty coming 
into sight very far below : a little landingstage, as it were, hanging into the void. As 
it swept up towards us our pace diminished 
very rapidly, and in a few moments, as it 
seemed, we were abreast of it and at rest. A 
mooring-rope was flung and grasped, and I 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 295 

found myself pulled down to a level with a 
great crowd of Selenites, who jostled to 
see me. 

" It was an incredible crowd. Suddenly and 
violently there was forced upon my attention 
the vast amount of difference there is amongst 
these beings of the moon. 

" Indeed, there seemed not two alike in all 
that jostling multitude. They differed in 
shape, they differed in size, they rang all the 
horrible changes on the theme of Selenite form! 
Some bulged and overhung, some ran about 
among the feet of their fellows. All of them 
had a grotesque and disquieting suggestion 
of an insect that has somehow contrived to 
mock humanity ; but all seemed to present 
an incredible exaggeration of some particular 
feature : one had a vast right fore-limb, an 
enormous antennal arm, as it were ; one 
seemed all leg, poised, as it were, on stilts ; 
another protruded the edge of his face mask 
into a nose-like organ that made him startlingly human until one saw his expressionless 
gaping mouth. The strange and (except for 
the want of mandibles and palps) most insectlike head of the mooncalf-minders underwent, 
indeed, the most incredible transformations : 
here it was broad and low, here high and 



296 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

narrow ; here its leathery brow was drawn 
out into horns and strange features ; here it 
was whiskered and divided, and there with a 
grotesquely human profile. One distortion was 
particularly conspicuous. There were several 
brain cases distended like bladders to a huge 
size, with the face mask reduced to quite small 
proportions. There were several amazing 
forms, with heads reduced to microscopic proportions and blobby bodies ; and fantastic, 
flimsy things that' existed, it would seem, only 
as a basis for vast, trumpet-like protrusions 
of the lower part of the mask. And oddest of 
all, as it seemed to me for the moment, two 
or three of these weird inhabitants of a subterranean world, a world sheltered by innumerable miles of rock from sun or rain, carried 
umbrellas in their tentaculate hands !  real terrestrial-looking umbrellas ! And then I thought 
of the parachutist I had watched descend. 

" These moon people behaved exactly as a 
human crowd might have done in similar circumstances : they jostled and thrust one another, they shoved one another aside, they even 
clambered upon one another to get a glimpse 
of me. Every moment they increased in numbers, and pressed more urgently upon the discs 
of my ushers"  Cavor does not explain what 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 297 

he means by this  " every moment fresh shapes 
emerged from the shadows and forced themselves upon my astounded attention. And 
presently I was signed and helped into a sort 
of litter, and lifted up on the shoulders of 
strong-armed bearers, and so borne through 
the twilight over this seething multitude towards the apartments that were provided for 
me in the moon. All about me were eyes, 
faces, masks, a leathery noise like the rustling 
of beetle wings, and a great bleating and 
cricket-like twittering of Selenite voices. . . ." 

We ofather he was taken to a " hexaofonal 
apartment," and there for a space he was confined. Afterwards he was given a much more 
considerable liberty ; indeed, almost as much 
freedom as one has in a civilised town on 
earth. And it would appear that the mysterious being who is the ruler and master of 
the moon appointed two Selenites "with large 
heads " to guard and study him, and to establish whatever mental communications were possible with him. And, amazing and incredible 
as it may seem, these two creatures, these 
fantastic men-insects, these beings of another 
world, were presently communicating with 
Cavor by means of terrestrial speech. 



298 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

Cavor speaks of them as Phi-oo and Tsi-puff. 
PhI-00, he says, was about 5 ft. high ; he had 
small, slender legs about 18 in. long, and slight 
feet of the common lunar pattern. On these 
balanced a little body, throbbing with the 
pulsations of his heart. He had long, soft, 
many-jointed arms ending in a tentacled grip, 
and his neck was many-jointed in the usual 
way, but exceptionally short and thick. His 
head, says Cavor  apparently alluding to some 
previous description that has gone astray in 
space  is of the common lunar type, but 
strangely modified. The mouth has the usual 
expressionless gape, but it is unusually small 
and pointing downward, and the mask is reduced to the size of a large flat nose-flap. On 
either side are the little eyes. 
 The rest of the head is distended into a 
huge globe, and the chitinous leathery cuticle 
of the mooncalf herds thins out to a mere 
membrane, through which the pulsating brain 
movements are distinctly visible. He is n 
creature, indeed, with a tremendously hypertrophied brain, and with the rest of his organism 
both relatively and absolutely dwarfed." 

In another passage Cavor compares the 
back view of him to Atlas supporting the 
world. Tsi-puff, it seems, was a very similar 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 299 

insect, but his "face" was drawn out to a 
considerable length, and the brain hypertrophy 
being in different regions, his head was not 
round but pear-shaped, with the stalk downward. There were also litter-carriers, lop-sided 
beings with enormous shoulders, very spidery 
ushers, and a squat foot attendant in Cavor's 
retinue. 

The manner in which Phi-00 and Tsi-puff 
attacked the problem of speech was fairly obvious. They came into this " hexagonal cell " 
in which Cavor was confined, and began imitating every sound he made, beginning with a 
cough. He seems to have grasped their intention with great quickness, and to have 
begun repeating words to them and pointing 
to indicate the application. The procedure 
was probably always the same. Phi-00 would 
attend to Cavor for a space, then point also 
and say the word he had heard. 

The first word he mastered was "man," and 
the second "Mooney"  which Cavor on the 
spur of the moment seems to have used instead 
of " Selenite " for the moon race. As soon as 
Phi-00 was assured of the meaning of a word 
he repeated it to Tsi-puff, who remembered 
it infallibly. They mastered over one hundred 
English nouns at their first session. 



300 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

Subsequently it seems they brought an artist 
with them to assist the work of explanation 
with sketches and diagrams  Cavor's drawings 
being rather crude. He was, says Cavor, "a 
being with an active arm and an arresting 
eye," and he seemed to draw with incredible 
swiftness. 

The eleventh message is undoubtedly only a 
fragment of a longer communication. After 
some broken sentences, the record of which is 
unintelligible, it goes on :  

" But it will interest only linguists, and delay 
me too long, to give the details of the series of 
intent parleys of which these were the beginning, and, indeed, I very much doubt if I could 
give in anything like the proper order all the 
twistings and turnings that we made in our 
pursuit of mutual comprehension. Verbs were 
soon plain sailing  at least, such active verbs as 
I could express by drawings ; some adjectives 
were easy, but when it came to abstract nouns, 
to prepositions, and the sort of hackneyed 
figures of speech by means of which so much 
is expressed on earth, it was like diving in 
cork-jackets. Indeed, these difficulties were 
insurmountable until to the sixth lesson came 
a fourth assistant, a being with a huge, footballshaped head, whose ore was clearly the pursuit 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 301 

of intricate analogy. He entered in a preoccupied manner, stumbling against a stool, and the 
difficulties that arose had to be presented to 
him with a certain amount of clamour and 
hitting and pricking before they reached his 
apprehension. But once he was involved his 
penetration was amazing. Whenever there 
came a need of thinking beyond Phi-oo's by 
no means limited scope, this prolate-headed 
person was in request, but he invariably told 
the conclusion to Tsi-puff, in order that it 
might be remembered ; Tsi-puff was ever the 
arsenal for facts. And so we advanced again. 

"It seemed long and yet brief  a matter of 
days before I was positively talking with these 
insects of the moon. Of course, at first it was 
an intercourse infinitely tedious and exasperating, but imperceptibly it has grown to comprehension. And my patience has grown to 
meet its limitations. Phi-00 it is who does all 
the talking. He does it with a vast amount of 
meditative provisional ' M'm  M'm,' and he 
has caught up one or two phrases, If I may 
say,' ' If you understand,' and beads all his 
speech with them. 

"Thus he would discourse. Imagine him 
explaining his artist. 
 M'm  M'm  he  if I may say  draw. 



302 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

Eat little  drink little  draw. Love draw. No 
other thing. Hate all who not draw like him. 
Angry. Hate all who draw like him better. 
Hate most people. Hate all who not think all 
world for to draw. Angry. M'm. All things 
mean nothing to him  only draw. He like 
you ... if you understand. ... New thing 
to draw. Ugly  striking. Eh . 
 ' He'  turning to Tsi-puff  'love remember 
words. Remember wonderful more than any. 
Think no, draw no  remember. Say '  here 
he referred to his gifted assistant for a word 
 ' histories  all things. He hear once  say 
ever.' 

"It is more wonderful to me than I dreamt 
that anything ever could be again, to hear, in 
this perpetual obscurity, these extraordinary 
creatures  for even familiarity fails to weaken 
the inhuman effect of their appearance continually piping a nearer approach to coherent earthly speech,  asking questions, giving 
answers. I feel that I am casting back to 
the fable-hearing period of childhood again, 
when the ant and the grasshopper talked together and the bee judged between them. . . ." 

And while these linguistic exercises were 
going on Cavor seems to have experienced a con


NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 303 

siderable relaxation of his confinement.' The 
first dread and distrust our unfortunate conflict 
aroused is being," he said, "continually effaced 
by the deliberate rationality of all I do." . . . 
" I am now able to come and go as I please, or 
I am restricted only for my own good. So it is 
I have been able to get at this apparatus, and, 
assisted by a happy find among the material 
that is littered in this enormous store-cave, I 
have contrived to despatch these messages. So 
far not the slightest attempt has been made to 
interfere with me in this, though I have made 
it quite clear to Phi-00 that I am signalling to 
the earth. 

"'You talk to other?' he asked, watching 
me. 

"'Others,' said I. 

" ' Others,' he said. ' Oh yes. Men ' 

' And I went on transmitting." 

Cavor was continually making corrections in 
his previous accounts of the Selenites as fresh 
facts flowed in upon him to modify his conclusions, and accordingly one gives the quotations 
that follow with a certain amount of reservation. 
They are quoted from the ninth, thirteenth, and 
sixteenth messages, and, altogether vague and 
fragmentary as they are, they probably give as 



304 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

complete a picture of the social life of this 
strange community as mankind can now hope 
to have for many generations. 

" In the moon," says Cavor, "every citizen 
knows his place. He is born to that place, and 
the elaborate discipline of training and education and surgery he undergoes fits him at last 
so completely to it that he has neither ideas 
nor organs for any purpose beyond it. ' Why 
should he ? ' Phi-oo would ask. If, for example, 
a Selenite is destined to be a mathematician, 
his teachers and trainers set out at once to 
that end. They check any incipient disposition to other pursuits, they encourage his 
mathematical bias with a perfect psychological 
skill. His brain grows, or at least the mathematical faculties of , his brain grow, and the rest 
of him only so much as is necessary to sustain 
this essential part of him. At last, save for 
rest and food, his one delight lies in the exercise and display of his faculty, his one interest 
in its application, his sole society with other 
specialists in his own line. His brain grows 
continually larger, at least so far as the portions engaging in mathematics are concerned ; 
they bulge ever larger and seem to suck all life 
and vigour from the rest of his frame. His 
limbs shrivel, his heart and digestive organs 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 305 
diminish, his insect face is hidden under its 
bulging contours. His voice becomes a mere 
stridulation for the stating of formula ; he seems 
deaf to all but properly enunciated problems. 
The faculty of laughter, save for the sudden 
discovery of some paradox, is lost to him ; his 
deepest emotion is the evolution of a novel computation. And so he attains his end. 

"Or, again, a Selenite appointed to be a 
minder of mooncalves is from his earliest years 
induced to think and live mooncalf, to find his 
pleasure in mooncalf lore, his exercise in their 
tending and pursuit. He is trained to become 
wiry and active, his eye is indurated to the 
tight wrappings, the angular contours that constitute a 'smart mooncalfishness.' He takes at 
last no interest in the deeper part of the moon ; 
he regards all Selenites not equally versed in 
mooncalves with indifference, derision, or hostility.  His thoughts are of mooncalf pastures, 
and his dialect an accomplished mooncalf technique. So also he loves his work, and discharges in perfect happiness the duty that 
justifies his being. And so it is with all sorts 
and conditions of Selenites each is a perfect 
unit in a world machine. ... 
' These beings with big heads, on whom the 
intellectual labours fall, form a sort of aris
U 



3o6 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

tocracy in this strange society, and at the head 
of them, quintessential of the moon, is that 
marvellous gigantic ganglion the Grand Lunar, 
into whose presence I am finally to come. The 
unlimited development of the minds of the 
intellectual class is rendered possible by the 
absence of any bony skull in the lunar anatomy, 
that strange box of bone that clamps about the 
developing brain of man, imperiously insisting  thus far and no farther ' to all his possibilities. 
They fall into three main classes differing 
greatly in influence and respect. There are 
the administrators, of whom Phi-oo is one, 
Selenites of considerable initiative and versatility, responsible each for a certain cubic 
content of the moon's bulk ; the experts like 
the football-headed thinker, who are trained to 
perform certain special operations ; and the 
eruditCj who are the repositories of all knowledge. To this latter class belongs Tsi-puff, 
the first lunar professor of terrestrial languages. 
With regard to these latter, it is a curious little 
thing to note that the unlimited growth of the 
lunar brain has rendered unnecessary the invention of all those mechanical aids to brain 
work which have distinguished the career of 
 man. There are no books, no records of any 
(f sort, no libraries or inscriptions. All knowledge 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 307 

is stored in distended brains much as the honeyants of Texas store honey in their distended 
abdomens. The lunar Somerset House and 
the lunar British Museum Library are collections of living brains. . . . 
 The less specialised administrators, I note, 
do for the most part take a very lively interest 
in me whenever they encounter me. They 
will come out of the way and stare at me and 
ask questions to which Phi-00 will reply. I 
see them going hither and thither with a retinue 
of bearers, attendants, shouters, parachutecarriers, and so forth  queer groups to see. 
The experts for the most part ignore me 
completely, even as they ignore each other, 
or notice me only to begin a clamorous exhibition of their distinctive skill. The erudite 
for the most part are rapt in an impervious 
and apoplectic complacency, from which only 
a denial of their erudition can rouse them. 
Usually they are led about by little watchers 
and attendants, and often there are small and 
active-looking creatures, small females usually, 
that I am inclined to think are a sort of wife 
to them ; but some of the profounder scholars 
are altogether too great for locomotion, and 
are carried from place to place in a sort of 
sedan tub, wabbling jellies of knowledge that 



3o8 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

enlist my respectful astonishment. I have just 
passed one in coming to this place where I am 
permitted to amuse myself with these electrical 
toys, a vast, shaven, shaky head, bald and 
thin-skinned, carried on his grotesque stretcher. 
In front and behind came his bearers, and curious, almost trumpet-faced, news disseminators 
shrieked his fame. 

" I have already mentioned the retinues that 
accompany most of the intellectuals : ushers, 
bearers, valets, extraneous tentacles and muscles, as it were, to replace the abortive physical 
powers of these hypertrophied minds. Porters 
almost invariably accompany them. There are 
also extremely swift messengers with spiderlike legs, and ' hands ' for grasping parachutes, 
and attendants with vocal organs that could 
well-nigh wake the dead. Apart from their 
controlling intelligence these subordinates are 
as inert and helpless as umbrellas in a stand. 
They exist only in relation to the orders 
they have to obey, the duties they have to 
perform. 

"The bulk of these insects, however, who 
go to and fro upon the spiral ways, who fill the 
ascending balloons and drop past me clinging 
to flimsy parachutes, are, I gather, of the operative class. Machine hands,' indeed, some of 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 309 

these are 111 actual nature  it is no figure of 
speech, the single tentacle of the mooncalf herd 
is profoundly modified for clawing, lifting, 
guiding, the rest of them no more than necessary subordinate appendages to these important 
parts. Some, who I suppose deal with bellstriking mechanisms, have enormously developed auditory organs ; some whose work 
lies in delicate chemical operations project 
a vast olfactory organ ; others again have flat 
feet for treadles with anchylosed joints ; and 
others  who I have been told are glass-blowers 
 seem mere lung-bellows. But every one of 
these common Selenites I have seen at work is 
exquisitely adapted to the social need it meets. 
Fine work is done by fined-down workers, 
amazingly dwarfed and neat. Some I could 
hold on the palm of my hand. There is even 
a sort of turnspit Selenite, very common, whose 
duty and only delight it is to supply the motive 
power for various small appliances. And to 
rule over these things and order any errincr 
tendency there might be in some aberrant 
natures are the most muscular beings I have 
seen in the moon, a sort of lunar police, who 
must have been trained from their earliest years 
to give a perfect respect and obedience to the 
swollen heads. 



3IO THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" The making of these various sorts of 
operative must be a very curious and interesting process. I am still very much in the dark 
about it, but quite recently I came upon a 
number of young Selenites confined in jars 
from which only the fore-limbs protruded, who 
were being compressed to become machineminders of a special sort. The extended 
' hand ' in this highly developed system of 
technical education is stimulated by irritants 
and nourished by injection, while the rest of 
the body is starved. Phi-oo, unless I misunderstood him, explained that in the earlier 
stages these queer little creatures are apt to 
display signs of suffering in their various 
cramped situations, but they easily become 
indurated to their lot ; and he took me on to 
where a number of flexible-limbed messengers 
were being drawn out and broken in. It is 
quite unreasonable, I know, but such glimpses of 
the educational methods of these beings affect 
me disagreeably. I hope, however, that may 
pass off, and I may be able to see more of this 
aspect of their wonderful social order. That 
wretched-looking hand-tentacle sticking out of 
its jar seemed to have a sort of limp appeal for 
lost possibilities ; it haunts me still, although, 
cf course, it is really in the end a far more 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 311 

humane proceeding than our earthly method of 
leaving children to grow into human beings, 
and then making machines of them. 

" Quite recently, too  I think it was on the 
eleventh or twelfth visit I made to this apparatus  I had a curious light upon the lives of 
these operatives. I was being guided through 
a short cut hither, instead of going down the 
spiral and by the quays of the Central Sea. 
From the devious windings of a long, dark 
gallery we emerged into a vast, low cavern, 
pervaded by an earthy smell, and, as things 
go in this darkness, rather brightly lit. The 
light came from a tumultuous growth of livid 
fungoid shapes  some indeed singularly like 
our terrestrial mushrooms, but standing as 
high or higher than a man. 

" ' Mooneys eat these ? " said I to Phi-oo. 

"Yes, food.' 

" ' Goodness me ! ' I cried ; ' what's that ? ' 

" My eye had just caught the figure of an 
exceptionally big and ungainly Selenite lying 
motionless among the stems, face downward. 
We stopped. 

" ' Dead ? ' I asked. (For as yet I have 
seen no dead in the moon, and I have 
grown curious.) 

"'JVo!' exclaimed Phi-oo. 'Him  worker 



312 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

 no work to do. Get little drink then  make 
sleep  till we him want. What good him 
wake, eh ? No want him walking about.' 

" ' There's another ! ' cried I. 

"And indeed all that huge extent of mushroom ground was, I found, peppered with 
these prostrate figures sleeping under an 
opiate until the moon had need of them. 
There were scores of them of all sorts, and 
we were able to turn over some of them, and 
examine them more precisely than I had been 
able to do previously. They breathed noisily 
at my doing so, but did not wake. One I 
remember very distinctly : he left a strong 
impression, I think, because some trick of the 
light and of his attitude was strongly suggestive of a drawn-up human figure. His forelimbs were long, delicate tentacles  he was 
some kind of refined manipulator  and the 
pose of his slumber suggested a submissive 
suffering. No doubt it was quite a mistake 
for me to interpret his expression in that way, 
but I did. And as Phi-oo rolled him over 
into the darkness amongf the livid fleshiness 
again I felt a distinctly unpleasant sensation, 
although as he rolled the insect in him was 
confessed. 

" It simply illustrates the unthinking way 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 313 

in which one acquires habits of feeling. 
To drug the worker one does not want and 
toss him aside is surely far better than to 
expel him from his factory to wander starving 
in the streets. In every complicated social 
community there is necessarily a certain intermittency of employment for all specialised 
labour, and in this way the trouble of an 'unemployed' problem is altogether anticipated. 
And yet, so unreasonable are even scientifically trained minds, I still do not like the 
memory of those prostrate forms amidst those 
quiet, luminous arcades of fleshy 'growth, and 
I avoid that short cut in spite of the inconveniences of the longer, more noisy, and more 
crowded alternative. 

"My alternative route takes me round by 
a huge, shadowy cavern, very crowded and 
clamorous, and here it is I see peering out of 
the hexagonal openings of a sort of honeycomb 
wall, or parading a large open space behind, or 
selecting the toys and amulets made to please 
them by the dainty-tentacled jewellers who 
work in kennels below, the mothers of the 
moon-world the queen bees, as it were, of the 
hive. They are noble-looking beings, fantastically and sometimes quite beautifully adorned, 



314 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

with a proud carnage, and, save for their mouths, 
almost microscopic heads. 

" Of the condition of the moon sexes, marrying and giving in marriage, and of birth and so 
forth among the Selenites, I have as yet been 
able to learn very little. With the steady progress of Phi-oo in English, however, my ignorance will no doubt as steadily disappear. I 
am of opinion that, as with the ants and bees, 
there is a large majority of the members in this 
community of the neuter sex. Of course on 
earth in our cities there are now many who 
never live that life of parentage which is the 
natural life of man. Here, as with the ants, 
this thing has become a normal condition of 
the race, and the whole of such replacement as 
is necessary falls upon this special and by no 
means numerous class of matrons, the mothers 
of the moon-world, large and stately beings 
beautifully fitted to bear the larval Selenite. 
Unless I misunderstand an explanation of 
Phi-oo's, they are absolutely incapable of cherishing the young they bring into the moon ; 
periods of foolish indulgence alternate with 
moods of aggressive violence, and as soon as 
possible the little creatures, who are quite soft 
and flabby and pale coloured, are transferred to 
the charge of celibate females, women ' workers ' 



NATURAL HISTORY OF SELENITES 315 

as it were, who in some cases possess brains of 
almost masculine dimensions." 

Just at this point, unhappily, this message 
broke off. Fragmentary and tantalising as 
the matter constituting this chapter is, it does 
nevertheless give a vague, broad impression 
of an altosrether strange and wonderful world 
 a world with which our own may have to 
reckon we know not how speedily. This intermittent trickle of messages, this whispering of 
a record needle in the stilliness of the mountain slopes, is the first warning of such a change 
in human conditions as mankind has scarcely 
imagined heretofore. In that satellite of ours 
there are new elements, new appliances, new 
traditions, an overwhelming avalanche of new 
ideas, a strange race with whom we must inevitably struggle for mastery  gold as common 
as iron or wood. . . . 



XXV 

THE GRAND LUNAR 

The penultimate message describes, with occasionally even elaborate detail, the encounter 
between Cavor and the Grand Lunar, who is 
the ruler or master of the moon. Cavor 
seems to have sent most of it without interference, but to have been interrupted in the 
concluding portion. The second came after 
an interval of a week. 

The first message begins : " At last I am 
able to resume this  " it then becomes 
illegible for a space, and after a time resumes in mid-sentence. 

The missing words of the following sentence 
are probably "the crowd." There follows 
quite clearly: "grew ever denser as we drew 
near the palace of the Grand Lunar  if I may 
call a series of excavations a palace. Everywhere faces stared at me  blank, chitinous 
gapes and masks, eyes peering over tremendous olfactory developments, eyes beneath 

316 



THE GRAND LUNAR 317 

monstrous forehead plates; an undergrowth 
of smaller creatures dodged and yelped, and 
helmet faces poised on sinuous, long-jointed 
necks appeared craning over shoulders and 
beneath armpits. Keeping a welcome space 
about me marched a cordon of stolid, scuttleheaded guards, who had joined us on our 
leaving the boat in which we had come along 
the channels of the Central Sea. The quickeyed artist with the little brain joined us 
also, and a thick bunch of lean porter-insects 
swayed and struggled under the multitude of 
conveniences that were considered essential 
to my state. I was carried in a litter during the 
final stage of our journey. This litter was made 
of some very ductile metal that looked dark 
to me, meshed and woven, and with bars of 
paler metal, and about me as I advanced 
there grouped itself a long and complicated 
procession. 

"In front, after the manner of heralds, 
marched four trumpet-faced creatures making 
a devastating bray; and then came squat, 
resolute-moving ushers before and behind,' 
and on either hand a galaxy of learned heads,' 
a sort of animated encyclopaedia, who were, 
Phi-00 explained, to stand about the Grand 
Lunar for purposes of reference. (Not a 



3i8 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

thing in lunar science, not a point of view 
or method of thinking, that these wonderful 
beings did not carry in their heads !) Followed guards and porters, and then Phi-oo's 
shivering brain borne also on a litter. Then 
came Tsi-puff in a slightly less important 
litter ; then myself on a litter of greater elegance than any other, and surrounded by my 
food and drink attendants. More trumpeters 
came next, splitting the ear with vehement 
outcries, and then several big brains, special 
correspondents one might well call them, or 
historiographers, charged with the task of 
observing and remembering every detail of 
this epoch-making interview. A company of 
attendants, bearing and dragging banners and 
masses of scented fungus and curious symbols, 
vanished in the darkness behind. The way 
was lined by ushers and officers in caparisons that gleamed like steel, and beyond 
their line, so far as my eyes could pierce the 
gloom, the heads of that enormous crowd extended. 

" I will own that I am still by no means 
indurated to the peculiar effect of the Selenite 
appearance, and to find myself, as it were, adrift 
on this broad sea of excited entomology was 
by no means agreeable. Just for a space I had 



THE GRAND LUNAR 3,9 

something very like what I should imagine 
people mean when they speak of the 'horrors.' 
It had come to me before in these lunar 
caverns, when on occasion I have found myself weaponless and with an undefended back, 
amidst a crowd of these Selenites, but never 
quite so vividly. It is, of course, as absolutely 
irrational a feeling as one could well have, 
and I hope gradually to subdue it. But just 
for a moment, as I swept forward into the 
welter of the vast crowd, it was only by gripping my litter tightly and summoning all my 
will-power that I succeeded in avoiding an 
outcry or some such manifestation. It lasted 
perhaps three minutes ; then I had myself in 
hand again. 

"We ascended the spiral of a vertical way 
for some time and then passed through a series 
of huge halls, dome-roofed and elaborately decorated. The approach to the Grand Lunar 
was certainly contrived to give one a vivid 
impression of his greatness. Each cavern one 
entered seemed greater and more boldly arched 
than its predecessor. This effect of progressive 
size was enhanced by a thin haze of faintly 
phosphorescent blue incense that thickened as 
one advanced, and robbed even the nearer 
figures of clearness. I seemed to advance 



320 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

continually to something larger, dimmer, and 
less material. 

" I must confess that all this multitude made 
me feel extremely shabby and unworthy. I was 
unshaven and unkempt ; I had brought no 
razor ; I had a coarse beard over my mouth. 
On earth I have always been inclined to despise 
any attention to my person beyond a proper 
care for cleanliness ; but under the exceptional 
circumstances in which I found myself, representing, as I did, my planet and my kind, and 
depending very largely upon the attractiveness 
of my appearance for a proper reception, I 
could have given much for something a little 
more artistic and dignified than the husks I 
wore. I had been so serene in the belief that 
the moon was uninhabited as to overlook such 
precautions altogether. As it was I was dressed 
in a flannel jacket, knickerbockers, and golfing 
stockings, stained with every sort of dirt the 
moon offered ; slippers (of which the left heel 
was wanting), and a blanket, through a hole 
in which I thrust my head. (These clothes, 
indeed, I still wear.) Sharp bristles are anything but an improvement to my cast of 
features, and there was an unmended tear at 
the knee of my knickerbockers that showed 
conspicuously as I squatted in my litter ; my 



THE GRAND LUNAR 321 

right stocking, too, persisted in getting about 
my ankle. I am fully alive to the injustice my 
appearance did humanity, and if by any expedient I could have improvised something a 
little out of the way and imposing I would have 
done so. But I could hit upon nothing. I 
did what I could with my blanket  folding it 
somewhat after the fashion of a toga, and for 
the rest I sat as upright as the swaying of my 
litter permitted. 

" Imagine the largest hall you have ever been 
in, imperfectly lit with blue light and obscured 
by a grey-blue fog, surging with metallic or 
livid-grey creatures of such a mad diversity as 
I have hinted. Imagine this hall to end in 
an open archway beyond which is a still larger 
hall, and beyond this yet another and still larger 
one, and so on. At the end of the vista, dimly 
seen, a flight of steps, like the steps of Ara 
Cceli at Rome, ascend out of sight. Higher 
and higher these steps appear to go as one 
draws nearer their base. But at last I came 
under a huge archway and beheld the summit 
of these steps, and upon it the Grand Lunar 
exalted on his throne. 

" He was seated in what was relatively a 
blaze of incandescent blue. This, and the 
darkness about him, gave him an effect of 



322 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

floating in a blue-black void. He seemed a 
small, self-luminous cloud at first, brooding on 
his sombre throne ; his brain case must have 
measured many yards in diameter. For some 
reason that I cannot fathom a number of blue 
search-lights radiated from behind the throne 
on which he sat, and immediately encircling 
him was a halo. About him, and little and 
indistinct in this glow, a number of bodyservants sustained and supported him, and 
overshadowed and standing in a huge semicircle beneath him were his intellectual subordinates, his remembrancers and computators 
and searchers and servants, and all the distinofuished insects of the court of the moon. 
Still lower stood ushers and messengers, and 
then all down the countless steps of the 
throne were guards, and at the base, enormous, 
various, indistinct, vanishing at last into an 
absolute black, a vast swaying multitude of 
the minor dignitaries of the moon. Their 
feet made a perpetual scraping whisper on 
the rocky floor, their limbs moved with a 
rustling murmur. 

" As I entered the penultimate hall the music 
rose and expanded into an imperial magnificence of sound, and the shrieks of the newsbearers died away. . . . 




The Grand Lunar 



THE GRAND LUNAR 323 

' I entered the last and greatest hall. . . . 

" My procession opened out like a fan. My 
ushers and guards went right and left, and the 
three litters bearing myself and Phi-00 and Tsipuff marched across a shiny darkness of floor 
to the foot of the giant stairs. Then began 
a vast throbbing hum, that mingled with the 
music. The two Selenites dismounted, but I 
was bidden remain seated  I imagine as a 
special honour. The music ceased, but not 
that humming, and by a simultaneous movement of ten thousand respectful heads my attention was directed to the enhaloed supreme 
intelligence that hovered above me. 

" At first as I peered into the radiating glow 
this quintessential brain looked very much like 
an opaque, featureless bladder with dim, undulating ghosts of convolutions writhing visibly 
within. Then beneath its enormity and just 
above the edge of the throne one saw with a 
start minute elfin eyes peering out of the glow. 
No face, but eyes, as if they peered through 
holes. At first I could see no more than these 
two staring little eyes, and then below I distinguished the little dwarfed body and its insect-jointed limbs shrivelled and white. The 
eyes stared down at me with a strange intensity, 
and the lower part of the swollen globe was 



324 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

wrinkled. Ineffectual-looking little hand-tentacles steadied this shape on the throne. . . . 

"It was great. It was pitiful. One forgot 
the hall and the crowd. 

" I ascended the staircase by jerks. It 
seemed to me that this darkly glowing brain 
case above us spread over me, and took more 
and more of the whole effect into itself as I 
drew nearer. The tiers of attendants and 
helpers grouped about their master seemed to 
dwindle and fade into the night. I saw that 
shadowy attendants were busy spraying that 
great brain with a cooling spray, and patting and sustaining it. For my own part, 
I sat gripping my swaying litter and staring 
at the Grand Lunar, unable to turn my gaze 
aside. And at last, as I reached a little landing that was separated only by ten steps or so 
from the supreme seat, the woven splendour 
of the music reached a climax and ceased, and 
I was left naked, as it were, in that vastness, 
beneath the still scrutiny of the Grand Lunar's 
eyes. 

"He was scrutinising the first man he had 
ever seen. . . . 

" My eyes dropped at last from his greatness 
to the faint figures in the blue mist about him, 
and then down the steps to the massed Selenites, 



THE GRAND LUNAR 325 

still and expectant in their thousands, packed on 
the floor below. Once again an unreasonable 
horror reached out towards me. . . . And 
passed. 

"After the pause came the salutation. I 
was assisted from my litter, and stood awkwardly while a number of curious and no doubt 
deeply symbolical gestures were vicariously performed for me by two slender officials. The 
encyclopaedic galaxy of the learned that had 
accompanied me to the entrance of the last hall 
appeared two steps above me and left and right 
of me, in readiness for the Grand Lunar's need, 
and Phi-oo's pale brain placed itself about 
half-way up to the throne in such a position 
as to communicate easily between us without 
turning his back on either the Grand Lunar or 
myself. Tsi-puff took up a position behind 
him. Dexterous ushers sidled sideways towards me, keeping a full face to the Presence. 
I seated myself Turkish fashion, and Phi-00 
and Tsi-puff also knelt down above me. There 
came a pause. The eyes of the nearer court 
went from me to the Grand Lunar and came 
back to me, and a hissing and piping of expectation passed across the hidden multitudes below 
and ceased. 

" That humming ceased. 



326 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

" For the first and last time in my experience 
the moon was silent. 

" I became aware of a faint wheezy noise. 
The Grand Lunar was addressing me. It was 
like the rubbing of a finger upon a pane of 
glass. 

" I watched him attentively for a time, and 
then glanced at the alert Phi-oo. I felt amidst 
these slender beings ridiculously thick and fleshy 
and solid ; my head all jaw and black hair. 
My eyes went back to the Grand Lunar. He 
had ceased ; his attendants were busy, and his 
shining superficies was glistening and running 
with cooling spray. 

" Phi-oo meditated through an interval. He 
consulted Tsi-puff Then he began piping his 
recognisable English  at first a little nervously, 
so that he was not very clear. 

" ' M'm  the Grand Lunar  wishes to say  
wishes to say  he gathers you are  m'm  men 
 that you are a man from the planet earth. 
He wishes to say that he welcomes you  
welcomes you  and wishes to learn  learn, if 
I may use the word  the state of your world, 
and the reason why you came to this.' 

"He paused. I was about to reply when he 
resumed. He proceeded to remarks of which 
the drift was not very clear, though I am in


THE GRAND LUNAR 327 

clined to think they were intended to be complimentary. He told me that the earth was to 
the moon what the sun is to the earth, and that 
the Selenites desired very greatly to learn about 
the earth and men. He then told me, no doubt 
in compliment also, the relative magnitude and 
diameter of earth and moon, and the perpetual 
wonder and speculation with which the Selenites 
had regarded our planet. I meditated with 
downcast eyes, and decided to reply that men 
too had wondered what might He in the moon, 
and had judged it dead, little recking of such 
magnificence as I had seen that day. The 
Grand Lunar, in token of recognition, caused 
his long blue rays to rotate in a very confusing manner, and all about the great hall ran 
the pipings and whisperings and rustlings of 
the report of what I had said. He then proceeded to put to Phi-00 a number of inquiries 
which were easier to answer. 

"He understood, he explained, that we 
lived on the surface of the earth, that our air 
and sea were outside the globe ; the latter 
part, indeed, he already knew from his astronomical specialists. He was very anxious to 
have more detailed information of what he 
called this extraordinary state of affairs, for 
from the solidity of the earth there had always 



328 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

been a disposition to regard it as uninhabitable. He endeavoured first to ascertain the 
extremes of temperature to which we earth 
beings were exposed, and he was deeply interested by my descriptive treatment of clouds 
and rain. His imagination was assisted by 
the fact that the lunar atmosphere in the outer 
galleries of the night side is not infrequently 
very foggy. He seemed inclined to marvel 
that we did not find the sunlight too intense 
for our eyes, and was interested in my attempt 
to explain that the sky was tempered to a 
bluish colour through the refraction of the air, 
though I doubt if he clearly understood that. 
I explained how the iris of the human eyes 
can contract the pupil and save the delicate 
internal structure from the excess of sunlight, 
and was allowed to approach within a few feet 
of the Presence in order that this structure 
might be seen. This led to a comparison of 
the lunar and terrestrial eyes. The former is 
not only excessively sensitive to such light as 
men can see, but it can also see heat, and 
every difference in temperature within the 
moon renders objects visible to it. 

"The iris was quite a new organ to the 
Grand Lunar. For a time he amused himself 
by flashing his rays into my face and watching 



THE GRAND LUNAR 329 

my pupils contract. As a consequence, I was 
dazzled and blinded for some little time. . . . 
' But in spite of that discomfort I found 
something reassuring by insensible degrees in 
the rationality of this business of question and 
answer. I could shut my eyes, think of my 
answer, and almost forget that the Grand 
Lunar has no face. ... 

" When I had descended again to my proper 
place the Grand Lunar asked how we sheltered 
ourselves from heat and storms, and I expounded to him the arts of building and furnishing. Here we wandered into misunderstandings and cross-purposes, due largely, I 
must admit, to the looseness of my expressions. For a long time I had great difficulty 
in making him understand the nature of a 
house. To him and his attendant Selenites it 
seemed, no doubt, the most whimsical thing in 
the world that men should build houses when 
they might descend into excavations, and an 
additional complication was introduced by the 
attempt I made to explain that men had 
originally begun their homes in caves, and 
that they were now taking their railways and 
many establishments beneath the surface. 
Here I think a desire for intellectual completeness betrayed me. There was also a 



330 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

considerable tangle due to an equally unwise 
attempt on my part to explain about mines. 
Dismissing this topic at last in an incomplete 
state, the Grand Lunar inquired what we did 
with the interior of our globe. 

" A tide of twittering and piping swept into 
the remotest corners of that great assembly 
when it was at last made clear that we men 
know absolutely nothing of the contents of the 
world upon which the immemorial generations 
of our ancestors had been evolved. Three 
times had I to repeat that of all the 4000 miles 
of substance between the earth and its centre 
men knew only to the depth of a mile, and 
that very vaguely. I understood the Grand 
Lunar to ask why had I come to the moon 
seeing we had scarcely touched our own planet 
yet, but he did not trouble me at that time to 
proceed to an explanation, being too anxious 
to pursue the details of this mad inversion of 
all his ideas. 

" He reverted to the question of weather, 
and I tried to describe the perpetually changing sky, and snow, and frost, and hurricanes. 
'But when the night comes,' he asked, 'is it 
not cold ? ' 

" I told him it was colder than by day. 

" ' And does not your atmosphere freeze ? ' 



THE GRAND LUNAR 331 

" I told him not ; that it was never cold 
enough for that, because our nights were so 
short. 
' ' Not even liquefy ? ' 

" I was about to say 'No,' but then it occurred to me that one part at least of our 
atmosphere, the water vapour of it, does sometimes liquefy and form dew, and sometimes 
freeze and form frost  a process perfectly 
analogous to the freezing of all the external 
atmosphere of the moon during its longer 
night. I made myself clear on this point, and 
from that the Grand Lunar went on to speak 
with me of sleep. For the need of sleep that 
comes so regularly every twenty-four hours to 
all things is part also of our earthly inheritance. On the moon they rest only at rare 
intervals, and after exceptional exertions. 
Then I tried to describe to him the soft splendours of a summer night, and from that I 
passed to a description of those animals that 
prowl by night and sleep by day. I told 
him of lions and tigers, and here it seemed 
as though we had come to a deadlock. For, 
save in their waters, there are no creatures 
in the moon not absolutely domestic and subject to his will, and so it has been for immemorial years. They have monstrous water 



332 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

creatures, but no evil beasts, and the idea of 
anything strong and large existing ' outside 
in the night is very difficult for them. . . . 

[The record is here too broken to transcribe 
for the space of perhaps twenty words or more.] 

" He talked with his attendants, as I suppose, upon the strange superficiality and unreasonableness of (man), who lives on the mere 
surface of a world, a creature of waves and 
winds, and all the chances of space, who cannot even unite to overcome the beasts that 
prey upon his kind, and yet who dares to 
invade another planet. During this aside I 
sat thinking, and then at his desire I told him 
of the different sorts of men. He searched me 
with questions. ' And for all sorts of work 
you have the same sort of men. But who 
thinks ? Who governs ? ' 

" I gave him an outline of the democratic 
method. 

" When I had done he ordered cooling 
sprays upon his brow, and then requested me 
to repeat my explanation, conceiving something had miscarried. 

"'Do they not do different things, then?' 
said Phi-oo. 

" Some I admitted were thinkers and some 
officials ; some hunted, some were mechanics. 



THE GRAND LUNAR 333 

some artists, some toilers. ' But aU rule,' I 
said. 

" And have they not different shapes to fit 
them to their different duties ? ' 

" ' None that you can see,' I said, ' except, 
perhaps, for clothes. Their minds perhaps 
differ a little I reflected. 

" Their minds must differ a great deal,' 
said the Grand Lunar, ' or they would all want 
to do the same things.' 

"In order to bring myself into a closer harmony with his preconceptions I said that his 
surmise was right. It was all hidden in the 
brain,' I said ; ' but the difference was there. 
Perhaps if one could see the minds and souls 
of men they would be as varied and unequal 
as the Selenites. There were great men and 
small men, men who could reach out far and 
wide, and men who could go swiftly ; noisy, 
trumpet-minded men, and men who could remember without thinking. . . . [The record 
is indistinct for three words.] 

" He interrupted me to recall me to my 
previous statement. ' But you said all men 
rule?' he pressed. 

" ' To a certain extent,' I said, and made, 
I fear, a denser fog with my explanation. 

"He reached out to a salient fact. ' Do 



334 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

you mean,' he asked, ' that there is no Grand 
Earthly?' 

" I thought of several people, but assured 
him finally there was none. I, explained that 
such autocrats and emperors as we had tried 
upon earth had usually ended in drink, or vice, 
or violence, and that the large and influential 
section of the people of the earth to which I 
belonged, the Anglo-Saxons, did not mean to 
try that sort of thing again. At which the 
Grand Lunar was even more amazed. 

" ' But how do you keep even such wisdom 
as you have ? ' he asked ; and I explained to 
him the way we helped our limited [a word 
omitted here, probably " brains "] with libraries 
of books. I explained to him how our science 
was growing by the united labours of innumerable little men, and on that he made no comment save that it was evident we had mastered 
much in spite of our social savagery, or we 
could not have come to the moon. Yet the 
contrast was very marked. With knowledge 
the Selenites grew and changed ; mankind 
stored their knowledge about them and remained brutes  equipped. He said this . . . 
[Here there is a short piece of the record 
indistinct.] 

"He then caused me to describe how we 



THE GRAND LUNAR 335 

went about this earth of ours, and I described 
to him our railways and ships. For a time 
he could not understand that we had had the 
use of steam only one hundred years, but when 
he did he was clearly amazed. (I may mention 
as a singular thing that the Selenites use years 
to count by, just as we do on earth, though 
I can make nothing of their numeral system. 
That, however, does not matter, because Phi-oo 
understands ours.) From that I went on to tell 
him that mankind had dwelt in cities only for 
nine or ten thousand years, and that we were 
still not united in one brotherhood, but under 
many different forms of government. This 
astonished the Grand Lunar very much, when 
it was made clear to him. At first he thought 
we referred merely to administrative areas. 

" ' Our States and Empires are still the rawest 
sketches of what order will some day be,' I 
said, and so I came to tell him. . . . [At this 
point a length of record that probably represents thirty or forty words is totally illegible.] 

" The Grand Lunar was greatly impressed 
by the folly of men in clinging to the inconvenience of diverse tongues. ' They want 
to communicate, and yet not to communicate,' 
he said, and then for a long time he questioned 
me closely concerning war. 



336 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

"He was at first perplexed and incredulous.  You mean to say,' he asked, seeking confirmation, ' that you run about over the surface of 
your world  this world, whose riches you have 
scarcely begun to scrape  killing one another 
for beasts to eat ? ' 

" I told him that was perfectly correct. 

" He asked for particulars to assist his 
imagination. ' But do not ships and your 
poor little cities get injured ? ' he asked, and 
I found the waste of property and conveniences 
seemed to impress him almost as much as the 
killing. Tell me more,' said the Cirand Lunar ; 
' make me see pictures. I cannot conceive 
these things.' 

"And so, for a space, though something loth, 
I told him the story of earthly War. 

" I told him of the first orders and ceremonies of war, of warnings and ultimatums, 
and the marshalling and marching of troops. 
I gave him an idea of manoeuvres and positions 
and battle joined. I told him of sieges and 
assaults, of starvation and hardship in trenches, 
and of sentinels freezing in the snow. I told 
him of routs and surprises, and desperate last 
stands and faint hopes, and the pitiless pursuit 
of fugitives and the dead upon the field. I 
told, too, of the past, of invasions and mas


THE GRAND LUNAR 337 

sacres, of the Huns and Tartars, and the wars 
of Mahomet and the Caliphs, and of the Crusades. And as I went on, and Phi-oo translated, the Selenltes cooed and murmured in 
a steadily intensified emotion. 
' I told them an ironclad could fire a shot 
of a ton twelve miles, and go through 20 ft. 
of iron  and how we could steer torpedoes 
under water. I went on to describe a Maxim 
gun in action, and what I could imagine of the 
Battle of Colenso. The Grand Lunar was so 
incredulous that he interrupted the translation of 
what I had said in order to have my verification 
of my account. They particularly doubted my 
description of the men cheering and rejoicing 
as they went into (? battle). 
' But surely they do not like it ! ' translated 
Phi-oo. 

" I assured them men of my race considered 
battle the most glorious experience of life, at 
which the whole assembly was stricken with 
amazement. 

"'But what good is this war?' asked the 
Grand Lunar, sticking to his theme. 

"'Oh! as {ov good!' said I ; ' it thins the 
population ! ' 

" ' But why should there be a need  ? ' . . . 

"There came a pause, the cooling sprays 



338 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

impinged upon his brow, and then he spoke 

again." 

At this point a series of undulations that have been 
apparent as a perplexing complication as far back as Cavor's 
description of the silence that fell before the first speaking 
of the Grand Lunar become confusingly predominant in 
the record. These undulations are evidently the result 
of radiations proceeding from a lunar source, and their 
persistent approximation to the alternating signals of Cavor 
is curiously suggestive of some operator deliberately seeking 
to mix them in with his message and render it illegible. 
At first they are small and regular, so that with a little care 
and the loss of very few words we have been able to disentangle Cavor's message ; then they become broad and 
larger, then suddenly they are irregular, with an irregularity 
that gives the effect at last of some one scribbling through 
a line of writing. For a long time nothing can be made of 
this madly zigzagging trace ; then quite abruptly the interruption ceases, leaves a few words clear, and then resumes 
and continues for all the rest of the message, completely 
obliterating whatever Cavor was attempting to transmit. 
Why, if this is indeed a deliberate intervention, the Selenites 
should have preferred to let Cavor go on transmitting his 
message in happy ignorance of their obliteration of its 
record, when it was clearly quite in their power and much 
more easy and convenient for them to stop his proceedings 
at any time, is a problem to which I can contribute nothing. 
The thing seems to have happened so, and that is all I can 
say. This last rag of his description of the Grand Lunar 
begins in mid-sentence :  
 interrogated me very closely upon my 
secret. I was able in a little while to get to 
an understanding with them, and at last to 



THE GRAND LUNAR 339 

elucidate what has been a puzzle to me ever 
since I realised the vastness of their science, 
namely, how it is they themselves have never 
discovered Cavorite.' I find they know of It 
as a theoretical substance, but they have always 
regarded it as a practical impossibility, because 
for some reason there is no helium In the moon, 
and helium " 

Across the last letters of helium slashes the resumption 
of that obliterating trace. Note that word "secret," for 
on that, and that alone, I base my interpretation of the 
message that follows, the last message, as both Mr. Wendigee and myself now believe it to be, that he is ever 
likely to send us. 



XXVI 

THE LAST MESSAGE CAVOR SENT TO THE EARTH 

In this unsatisfactory manner the penultimate 
message of Cavor dies out. One seems to see 
him away there in the blue obscurity amidst his 
apparatus intently signalling us to the last, all 
unaware of the curtain of confusion that drops 
between us ; all unaware, too, of the final dangers 
that even then must have been creeping upon 
him. His disastrous want of vulgar common 
sense had utterly betrayed him. He had talked 
of war, he had talked of all the strength and 
irrational violence of men, of their insatiable 
aggressions, their tireless futility of conflict. 
He had filled the whole moon world with this 
impression of our race, and then I think it is 
plain that he made the most fatal admission 
that upon himself alone hung the possibility 
 at least for a long time  of any further men 
reaching the moon. The line the cold, inhuman 
reason of the moon would take seems plain 
enough to me, and a suspicion of it, and then 



THE LAST MESSAGE CAVOR SENT 341 

perhaps some sudden sharp realisation of it, 
must have come to him. One imagines him 
going about the moon with the remorse of this 
fatal indiscretion growing in his mind. During a certain time I am inclined to guess the 
Grand Lunar was deliberating the new situation, and for all that time Cavor may have 
gone as free as ever he had gone. But 
obstacles of some sort prevented his getting 
to his electro-magnetic apparatus again after 
that message I have just given. For some 
days we received nothing. Perhaps he was 
having fresh audiences, and trying to evade 
his previous admissions. Who can hope to 
guess ? 

And then suddenly, like a cry in the night, 
like a cry that is followed by a stillness, came 
the last message. It is the briefest fragment, 
the broken beginnings of two sentences. 

The first was : "I was mad to let the Grand 
Lunar know " 

There was an interval of perhaps a minute. 
One imagines some interruption from without. 
A departure from the instrument  a dreadful 
hesitation among the looming masses of apparatus in that dim, blue-lit cavern  a sudden 
rush back to it, full of a resolve that came 
too late. Then, as if it were hastily trans


342 THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON 

mitted, came : " Cavorite made as follows : 
take " 

There followed one word, a quite unmeaning 
word as it stands : " uless." 

And that is all. 

It may be he made a hasty attempt to spell 
"useless" when his fate was close upon him. 
Whatever it was that was happening about that 
apparatus we cannot tell. Whatever it was we 
shall never, I know, receive another message 
from the moon. For my own part a vivid 
dream has come to my help, and I see, almost 
as plainly as though I had seen it in actual 
fact, a blue -lit shadowy dishevelled Cavor 
struggling in the grip of these insect Selenites, 
struggling ever more desperately and hopelessly as they press upon him, shouting, expostulating, perhaps even at last fighting, and 
being forced backward step by step out of all 
speech or sign of his fellows, for evermore into 
the Unknown  into the dark, into that silence 
that has no end. . . . 


THE NAPOLEON OF NOTTING HILL 

Chapter I  Introductory Remarks on the 
'Art of Prophecy 

THE human race, to which so many of 
my readers belong, has been playing 
at children's games from the beginning, and will probably do it till the end, which 
is a nuisance for the few people who grow 
up. And one of the games to which it is 
most attached is called, "Keep to-morrow 
dark," and which is also named (by the 
rustics in Shropshire, I have no doubt) "Cheat 
the Prophet." The players listen very carefully and respectfully to all that the clever 
men have to say about what is to happen in 
the next generation. The players then wait until 
all the clever men are dead, and bury them nicely. 
They then go and do something else. That is 
all. For a race of simple tastes, however, it is 
great fun. 

For human beings, being children, have the 
childish wilfulness and the childish secrecy. And 
they never have from the beginning of the 

13 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 



world done what the wise men have seen to be 
inevitable. They stoned the false prophets, it is 
said; but they could have stoned true prophets 
with a greater and juster enjoyment. Individually, men may present a more or less rational 
appearance, eating, sleeping, and scheming. But 
humanity as a whole is changeful, mystical, 
fickle, delightful. Men are men, but Man is a 
woman. 

But in the beginning of the twentieth century 
the game of Cheat the Prophet was made far 
more difficult than it had ever been before. 
The reason was, that there were so many 
prophets and so many prophecies, that it was 
difficult to elude all their ingenuities. When a 
man did something free and frantic and entirely 
his own, a horrible thought struck him afterwards; it might have been predicted. Whenever a duke climbed a lamp-post, when a dean 
got drunk, he could not be really happy, he 
could not be certain that he was not fulfilling some 
prophecy. In the beginning of the twentieth 
century you could not see the ground for clever 
men. They were so common that a stupid 
man was quite exceptional, and when they found 
him, they followed him in crowds down the 
street and treasured him up and gave him some 
high post in the State. And all these clever 

14 



Introductory Remarks 



men were at work giving accounts of what 
would happen in the next age, all quite clear, 
all quite keen-sighted and ruthless, and all quite 
different. And it seemed that the good old 
game of hoodwinking your ancestors could not 
really be managed this time, because the ancestors neglected meat and sleep and practical politics, so that they might meditate day and 
night on what their descendants would be likely 
to do. 

But the way the prophets of the twentieth 
century went to work was this They took 
something or other that was certainly going on 
in their time, and then said that it would go on 
more and more until something extraordinary 
happened. And very often they added that in 
some odd place that extraordinary thing had 
happened, and that it showed the signs of the 
times. 

Thus, for instance, there were Mr. H. G. 
Wells and others, who thought that science 
would take charge of the future; and just as the 
motor-car was quicker than the coach, so some 
lovely thing would be quicker than the motorcar; and so on for ever. And there arose from 
their ashes Dr. Quilp, who said that a man 
could be sent on his machine so fast round the 
world that he could keep up a long chatty con
15 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

versation in some old-world village by saying 
a word of a sentence each time he came round. 
And it was said that the experiment had been 
tried on an apoplectic old major, who was sent 
round the world so fast that there seemed to be 
(to the inhabitants of some other star) a continuous band round the earth of white whiskers, 
red complexion and tweeds  a thing like the ring 
of Saturn. 

Then there was the opposite school. There 
was Mr. Edward Carpenter, who thought we 
should in a very short time return to Nature, 
and live simply and slowly as the animals do. 
And Edward Carpenter was followed by James 
Pickie, D.D. (of Pocahontas College), who said 
that men were immensely improved by grazing, 
or taking their food slowly and continuously, 
after the manner of cows. And he said that he 
had, with the most encouraging results, turned 
city men out on all fours in a field covered with 
veal cutlets. Then Tolstoy and the Humanitarians said that the world was growing more 
merciful, and therefore no one would ever desire 
to kill. And Mr. Mick not only became a vegetarian, but at length declared vegetarianism 
doomed ("shedding," as he called it finely, "the 
green blood of the silent animals"), and predicted that men in a better age would live on 

16 




CITY MEN OUT ON ALL FOURS IN A FIELD COVERED WITH 
VEAL CUTLETS 



Introductory Remarks 



nothing but salt. And then came the pamphlet 
from Oregon (where the thing was tried), the 
pamphlet called "Why should Salt suffer ?" and 
there was more trouble. 

And on the other hand, some people were 
predicting that the lines of kinship would become narrower and sterner. There was Mr. 
Cecil Rhodes, who thought that the one thing of 
the future was the British Empire, and that 
there would be a gulf between those who were 
of the Empire and those who were not, between 
the Chinaman in Hong Kong and the Chinaman 
outside, between the Spaniard on the Rock of 
Gibraltar and the Spaniard off it, similar to the 
gulf between man and the lower animals. And 
in the same way his impetuous friend, Dr. Zoppi 
("the Paul of Anglo-Saxonism"), carried it yet 
further, and held that, as a result of this view, 
cannibalism should be held to mean eating a 
member of the Empire, not eating one of the 
subject peoples, who should, he said, be killed 
without needless pain. His horror at the idea 
of eating a man in British Guiana showed how 
they misunderstood his stoicism who thought 
him devoid of feeling. He was, however, in a 
hard position; as it was said that he had 
attempted the experiment, and, living in London, 
had to subsist entirely on Italian organ-grinders. 

17 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

And his end was terrible, for just when he had 
begun, Sir Paul Swiller read his great paper at 
the Royal Society, proving that the savages were 
not only quite right in eating their enemies, but 
right on moral and hygienic grounds, since it 
was true that the qualities of the enemy, when 
eaten, passed into the eater. The notion that the 
nature of an Italian organ-man was irrevocably 
growing and burgeoning inside him was almost 
more than the kindly old professor could bear. 

There was Mr. Benjamin Kidd, who said 
that the growing note of our race would be the 
care for and knowledge of the future. His idea 
was developed more powerfully by William 
Borker, who wrote that passage which every 
schoolboy knows by heart, about men in future 
ages weeping by the graves of their descendants, 
and tourists being shown over the scene of the 
historic battle which was to take place some centuries afterwards. 

And Mr. Stead, too, was prominent, who 
thought that England would in the twentieth 
century be united to America; and his young 
lieutenant, Graham Podge, who included the 
states of France, Germany, and Russia in the 
American Union, the State of Russia being 
abbreviated to Ra. 

There was Mr. Sidney Webb, also, who said 
18 



Introductory Remarks 



that the future would see a continuously increasing order and neatness in the life of the people, 
and his poor friend Fipps, who went mad and 
ran about the country with an axe, hackingbranches off the trees whenever there were not 
the same number on both sides. 

All these clever men were prophesying with 
every variety of ingenuity what would happen 
soon, and they all did it in the same way, by 
taking something they saw 'going strong as the 
saying is, and carrying it as far as ever their 
imagination could stretch. This, they said, was 
the true and simple way of anticipating the 
future. "J us t. as," said Dr. Pellkins, in a fine 
passage,  "just as when we see a pig in a litter 
larger than the other pigs, we know that by an 
unalterable law of the Inscrutable it will some 
day be larger than an elephant,  just as we know, 
when we see weeds and dandelions growing 
more and more thickly in a garden, that they 
must, in spite of all our efforts, grow taller than 
the chimney-pots and swallow the house from 
sight, so we know and reverently acknowledge, 
that when any power in human politics has shown 
for any period of time any considerable activity, 
it will go on until it reaches to the sky." 

And it did certainly appear that the prophets 
had put the people (engaged in the old game of 

l 9 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

Cheat the Prophet), in a quite unprecedented 
difficulty. It seemed really hard to do anything 
without fulfilling some of their prophecies. 

But there was, nevertheless, in the eyes of 
labourers in the streets, of peasants in the fields, 
of sailors and children, and especially women, a 
strange look that kept the wise men in a perfect 
fever of doubt. They could not fathom the 
motionless mirth in their eyes. They still had 
something up their sleeve; they were still playing 
the game of Cheat the Prophet. 

Then the wise men grew like wild things, and 
swayed hither and thither, crying, "What can 
it be? What can it be? What will London 
be like a century hence ? Is there anything we have 
not thought of? Houses upside down  more 
hygienic, perhaps? Men walking on hands 
 make feet flexible, don't you know? Moon 
. . . motor-cars ... no heads . . ." And so 
they swayed and wondered until they died and 
were buried nicely. 

Then the people went and did what they 
liked. Let me no longer conceal the painful 
truth. The people had cheated the prophets of 
the twentieth century. When the curtain goes 
up on this story, eighty years after the 
present date, London is almost exactly like what 
it is now. 

30 



Chapter II  The Man in Green 

VERY few words are needed to explain 
why London, a hundred years hence, 
will be very like it is now, or rather, 
since I must slip into a prophetic past, why 
London, when my story opens, was very like 
it was in those enviable days when I was still 
alive. 

The reason can be stated in one sentence. The 
people had absolutely lost_faith in revolutions. 
All revolutions are doctrinal  such as the 
French one, or the one that introduced Christianity. For it stands to common sense that 
you cannot upset all existing things, customs, 
and compromises, unless you believe in something outside them, something positive and 
divine. Now, England, during this century, lost 
all belief in this. It believed in a thing called 
Evolution. And it said, "All theoretic changes 
have ended in blood and ennui. If we change, 
we must change slowly and safely, as the animals 
do. Nature's revolutions are the only successful 
ones. There has been no conservative reaction in 
favour of tails." 

And some things did change. Things that 
were not much thought of dropped out of 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

sight. Things that had not often happened did 
not happen at all. Thus, for instance, the 
actual physical force ruling the country, the 
soldiers and police, grew smaller and smaller, 
and at last vanished almost to a point. The 
people combined could have swept the few 
policemen away in ten minutes: they did not, 
because they did not believe it would do them 
the least good. They had lost faith in revolutions. 

Democracy was dead; for no one minded 
the governing class governing. England was 
now practically a despotism, but not an 
hereditary one. Some one in the official class 
was made King. No one cared how: no one 
cared who. He was merely an universal secretary. 

In this manner it happened that everything 
in London was very quiet. That vague and 
somewhat depressed reliance upon things happening as they have always happened, which is 
with all Londoners a mood, had become an 
assumed condition. There was really no reason 
for any man doing anything but the thing he had 
done the day before. 

There was therefore no reason whatever why 
the three young men who had always walked up 
to their Government office together should not 

zz 



The Man in Green 



walk up to it together on this particular 
wintry and cloudy morning. Everything in that 
age had become mechanical, and Government 
clerks especially. All those clerks assembled 
regularly at their posts. Three of those clerks 
always walked into town together. All the 
neighbourhood knew them : two of them were 
tall and one short. And on this particular 
morning the short clerk was only a few seconds 
late to join the other two as they passed his 
gate: he could have overtaken them in three 
strides ; he could have called after them easily. But 
he did not. 

For some reason that will never be understood until all souls are judged (if they are ever 
judged; the idea was at this time classed with 
fetish worship) he did not join his two companions, but walked steadily behind them. The 
day was dull, their dress was dull, everything 
was dull; but in some odd impulse he walked 
through street after street, through district after 
district, looking at the backs of the two men, 
who would have swung round at the sound of 
his voice. Now, there is a law written in the 
darkest of the Books of Life, and it is this: 
If you look at a thing nine hundred and 
ninety-nine times, you are perfectly safe; if 
you look at it the thousandth time, you are 

23 



The "Napoleon of Notting Hill 

in frightful clanger of seeing it for the first 
time. 

So the short Government official looked at the 
coat-tails of the tall Government officials, and 
through street after street, and round corner after 
corner, saw only coat-tails, coat-tails, and again 
coat-tails  when, he did not in the least know 
why, something happened to his eyes. 

Two black dragons were walking backwards 
in front of him. Two black dragons were looking at him with evil eyes. The dragons were 
walking backwards it was true, but they kept 
their eyes fixed on him none the less. The eyes 
which he saw were, in truth, only the two buttons 
at the back of a frock-coat: perhaps some 
traditional memory of their meaningless character 
gave this half-witted prominence to their 
gaze. The slit between the tails was the noseline of the mobster: whenever the tails flapped 
in the winter wind the dragons licked their 
lips. It was only a momentary fancy, but the 
small clerk found it imbedded in his soul ever 
afterwards. He never could again think of men 
in frock-coats except as dragons walking backwards. He explained afterwards, quite tactfully 
and nicely, to his two official friends, that 
while feeling an inexpressible regard for each 
of them he could not seriously regard the face 

4 



The Man in Green 



of either of them as anything but a kind of 
tail. It was, he admitted, a handsome tail  a 
tail elevated in the air. But if, he said, any 
true friend of theirs wished to see their faces, 
to look into the eyes of their soul, that friend 
must be allowed to walk reverently round 
behind them, so as to see them from the rear. 
There he would see the two black dragons with 
the blind eyes. 

But when first the two black dragons sprang 
out of the fog upon the small clerk, they had 
merely the effect of all miracles  they changed 
the universe. He discovered the fact that all 
romantics know  that adventures happen on 
dull days, and not on sunny ones. When the 
chord of monotony is stretched most tight, then 
it breaks with a sound like song. He had scarcely 
noticed the weather before, but with the four dead 
eyes glaring at him he looked round and realised 
the strange dead day. 

The morning was wintry and dim, not misty, 
but darkened with that shadow of cloud or snow 
which steeps everything in a green or copper 
twilight. The light there is on such a day seems 
hot so much to come from the clear heavens as 
to be a phosphorescence clinging to the shapes 
themselves. The load of heaven and the clouds 
is like a load of waters, and the men move like 

25 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

fishes, feeling that they are on the floor of a sea. 
Everything in a London street completes the 
fantasy; the carriages and cabs themselves 
resemble deep-sea creatures with eyes of flame. 
He had been startled at first to meet two dragons. 
Now he found he was among deep-sea dragons 
possessing the deep sea. 

The two young men in front were like the 
small young man himself, well-dressed. The lines 
of their frock-coats and silk hats had that luxuriant severity which makes the modern fop, hideous 
y as he is, a favourite exercise of the modern 
draughtsman ; that element which Mr. Max Beerbohm has admirably expressed in speaking of 
"certain congruities of dark cloth and the rigid 
perfection of linen.". 

They walked with the gait of an affected 
snail, and they spoke at the longest intervals, 
dropping a sentence at about every sixth lamppost. 

They crawled on past the lamp-posts; their 
mien was so immovable that a fanciful description might almost say, that the lamp-posts 
crawled past the men, as in a dream. Then 
the small man suddenly ran after them and 
said  

"I want to get my hair cut. I say, do you 
know a little shop anywhere where they cut your 

26 



The Man in Green 



hair properly ? I keep on having my hair cut, but 
it keeps on growing again." 

One of the tall men looked at him with the air 
of a pained naturalist. 

"Why, here is a little place," cried the small 
man, with a sort of imbecile cheerfulness, as the 
bright bulging window of a fashionable toiletsaloon glowed abruptly out of the foggy twilight, y 
"Do you know, I often find hairdressers when 
I walk about London. I'll lunch with you at Cicconani's. You know, I'm awfully fond of hairdressers' shops. They're miles better than those 
nasty butchers'." And he disappeared into the 
doorway. 

The man called James continued to gaze after 
him, a monocle screwed into his eye. 

"What the devil do you make of that fellow ?" 
he asked his companion, a pale young man with a 
high nose. 

The pale young man reflected conscientiously 
for some minutes, and then said  

"Had a knock on his head when he was a kid, 
I should think." 

"No, I don't think it's that," replied the Honourable James Barker. "I've sometimes fancied 
he was a sort of artist, Lambert." 

"Bosh!" cried Mr. Lambert, briefly. 

"I admit I can't make him out," resumed 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

Barker, abstractedly; ''he never opens his mouth 
without saying something so indescribably 
half-witted that to call him a fool seems 
the very feeblest attempt at characterisation. 
But there's another thing about him that's rather 
funny. Do you know that he has the one 
collection of Japanese lacquer in Europe? Have 
you ever seen his books? All Greek poets 
and mediaeval French and that sort of 
thing. Have you ever been in his rooms? 
It's like being inside an amethyst. And he 
moves about in all that and talks like  like a 
turnip." 

"Well, damn all books. Your blue books as 
well," said the ingenuous Mr. Lambert, with a 
friendly simplicity. "You ought to understand such things. What do you make of 
him?" 

"He's beyond me," returned Barker. "But if 
you asked me for my opinion, I should say he 
was a man with a taste for nonsense, as they 
call it  artistic fooling, and all that kind of 
thing. And I seriously believe that he has 
talked nonsense so much that he has half 
bewildered his own mind and doesn't know 
the difference between sanity and insanity. 
He has gone round the mental world, so to 
speak, and found the place where the East and 

28 



The Man in Green 
y 

the West are one, and extreme idiocy is as good 
as sense. But I can't explain these psychological 
games. ,, 

"You can't explain them to me," replied Mr. 
Wilfrid Lambert, with candour. 

As they passed up the long streets towards 
their restaurant the copper twilight cleared 
slowly to a pale yellow, and by the time they 
reached it they stood discernible in a tolerable winter daylight. The Honourable James 
Barker, one of the most powerful officials in 
the English Government (by this time a 
rigidly official one), was a lean and elegant 
young man, with a blank handsome face and 
bleak blue eyes. He had a great amount of 
intellectual capacity, of that peculiar kind which 
raises a man from throne to throne and lets him 
die loaded with honours without having either 
amused or enlightened the mind of a single 
man. Wilfrid Lambert, the youth with the nose 
which appeared to impoverish the rest of his 
face, had also contributed little to the enlargement 
of the human spirit, but he had the honourable 
excuse of being a fool. 

Lambert would have been called a silly 
man; Barker, with all his cleverness, might 
have been called a stupid man. But mere silliness 
and stupidity sank into insignificance in 

29 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

the presence of the awful and mysterious 
treasures of foolishness apparently stored up in 
the small figure that stood waiting for them 
outside Cicconani's. The little man, whose 
name was Auberon Ouin, had an appearance 
compounded of a baby and an owl. His round 
head, round eyes, seemed to have been designed 
by nature playfully with a pair of compasses. 
His fiat dark hair and preposterously long frockcoat gave him something of the look of a 
child's "Noah." When he entered a room of 
strangers, they mistook him for a small boy, and 
wanted to take him on their knees, until he spoke, 
when they perceived that a boy would have been 
more intelligent. 

"I have been waiting quite a long time," said 
Quin, mildly. "It's awfully funny I should see 
you coming up the street at last." 

"Why?" asked Lambert, staring. "You told 
us to come here yourself." 

"My mother used to tell people to come to 
places," said the sage. 

They were about to turn into the restaurant 
with a resigned air, when their eyes were caught 
by something in the street. The weather, though 
cold and blank, was now quite clear and across 
the dull brown of the wood pavement and between 
the dull grey terraces was moving something not 

30 



The Man in Green 



to be seen for miles around  not to be seen 
perhaps at that time in England  a man dressed 
in bright colours. A small crowd hung on the 
man's heels. 

He was a tall stately man, clad in a military 
uniform of brilliant green, splashed with great 
silver facings. From the shoulder swung a 
short green furred cloak, somewhat like that of 
a Hussar, the lining of which gleamed every now 
and then with a kind of tawny crimson. His 
breast glittered with medals; round his neck was 
the red ribbon and star of some foreign order; 
and a long straight sword, with a blazing hilt, 
trailed and clattered along the pavement. At 
this time the pacific and utilitarian development 
of Europe had relegated all such customs to 
the Museums. The only remaining force, the 
small but well-organised police, were attired in 
a sombre and hygienic manner. But even 
those who remembered the last Life Guards and 
Lancers who disappeared in 19 12 must have 
known at a glance that this wasjnot,. and never 
had been, an English uniform; and this conviction would have been heightened by the yellow 
aquiline face, like Dante carved in bronze, which 
rose, crowned with white hair, out of the green 
military collar, a keen and distinguished, but not 
an English face. 

31 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

The magnificence with which the green-clad 
gentleman walked down the centre of the road 
would be something difficult to express in 
human language. For it was an ingrained 
simplicity and arrogance, something in the mere 
carriage of the head and body, which made ordinary moderns in the street stare after him; but 
it had comparatively little to do with actual 
conscious gestures or expression. In the matter 
of these merely temporary movements, the 
man appeared to be rather worried and 
inquisitive, but he was inquisitive with the 
inquisitiveness of a despot and worried as with 
the responsibilities of a god. The men who 
lounged and wondered behind him followed 
partly with an astonishment at his brilliant 
uniform, that is to say, partly because of that 
instinct which makes us all follow one who looks 
like a madman, but far more because of that 
instinct which makes all men follow (and worship) any one who chooses to behave like a king. 
He had to so sublime an extent that great quality 
of royalty  an almost imbecile unconsciousness 
of everybody, that people went after him as they 
do after kings  to see what would be the first 
thing or person he would take notice of. And 
all the time, as we have said, in spite of his quiet 
splendour, there was an air about him as if 

32 



The Man in Green 



he were looking for somebody; an expression of 
inquiry. 

Suddenly that expression of inquiry vanished, 
none could tell why, and was replaced by an 
expression of contentment. Amid the rapt 
attention of the mob of idlers, the magnificent 
green gentleman deflected himself from his direct 
course down the centre of the road and walked 
to one side of it. He came to a halt opposite to 
a large poster of Colman's Mustard erected on a 
wooden hoarding. His spectators almost held 
their breath. 

He took from a small pocket in his uniform 
a little penknife; with this he made a slash at 
the stretched paper. Completing the rest of the 
operation with his fingers, he tore off a strip or 
rag of paper, yellow in colour and wholly irregular in outline. Then for the first time the great 
being addressed his adoring onlookers  

"Can any one," he said, with a pleasing foreign 
accent, "lend me a pin ?" 

Mr. Lambert, who happened to be nearest, and 
who carried innumerable pins for the purpose of 
attaching innumerable buttonholes, lent him one, 
which was received with extravagant but dignified 
bows, and hyperboles of thanks. 

The gentleman in green, then, with every 
appearance of being gratified, and even puffed up, 

33 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

pinned the piece of yellow paper to the green silk 
and silver-lace adornments of his breast. Then 
he turned his eyes round again, searching and 
unsatisfied. 

"Anything else I can do, sir?" asked Lambert, 
with the absurd politeness of the Englishman 
when once embarrassed. 

"Red," said the stranger, vaguely, "red." 

"I beg your pardon ?" 

"I beg yours also, Sefior," said the stranger, 
bowing. "I was wondering whether any of you 
had any red about you." 

"Any red about us ?  well really  no, I don't 
think I have  I used to carry a red bandanna 
once, but  " 

"Barker," asked Auberon Quin, suddenly, 
"where's your red cockatoo? Where's your red 
cockatoo ?" 

"What do you mean?" asked Barker, desperately. "What cockatoo? You've never seen me 
with any cockatoo." 

"I know," said Auberon, vaguely mollified. 
"Where's it been all the time?" 

Barker swung round, not without resentment. 

"I am sorry, sir," he said, shortly but civilly, 
"none of us seem to have anything red to lend 
you. But why, if one may ask  " 

34 



The Man in Green 



"I thank you, Senor, it is nothing. I can, since 
there is nothing else, fulfil my own requirements. " 

And standing for a second of thought with 
the penknife in his hand, he stabbed his left palm. 
The blood fell with so full a stream that it 
struck the stones without dripping. The foreigner 
pulled out his handkerchief and tore a piece from 
it with his teeth. The rag was immediately soaked 
in scarlet. 

"Since you are so generous, Senor," he said, 
"another pin, perhaps." 

Lambert held one out. with eyes protruding 
like a frog's. 

The red linen was pinned beside the yellow 
paper, and the foreigner took off his hat. 

"I have to thank you all, gentlemen," he said; 
and wrapping the remainder of the handkerchief 
round his bleeding hand, he resumed his walk with 
an overwhelming stateliness. 

While all the rest paused, in some disorder, 
little Mr. Auberon Quin ran after the stranger 
and stopped him, with hat in hand. Considerably 
to everybody's astonishment, he addressed him 
in the purest Spanish  

"Senor," he said in that language, "pardon a 
hospitality, perhaps indiscreet, towards one who 
appears to be a distinguished, but a solitary guest 

35 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

in London. Will you do me and my friends, with 
whom you have held some conversation, the 
honour of lunching with us at the adjoining restaurant ?" 

The man in the green uniform had turned a 
fiery colour of pleasure at the mere sound of his 
own language, and he accepted the invitation with 
that profusion of bows which so often shows, in 
the case of the Southern races, the falsehood of 
the notion that ceremony has nothing to do with 
feeling. 

"Sefior," he said, "your language is my own; 
but all my love for my people shall not lead me 
to deny to yours the possession of so chivalrous 
an entertainer. Let me say that the tongue is 
Spanish but the heart English." And he passed 
with the rest into Cicconani's. 

"Now, perhaps' said Barker, over the fish and 
sherry, intensely polite, but burning with curiosity, "perhaps it would be rude of me to ask 
why you did that?" 

"Did what, Senior ?" asked the guest, who spoke 
English quite well, though in a manner indefinably 
American. 

"Well," said the Englishman, in some confusion, "I mean tore a strip off a hoarding and 
... er ... cut yourself . . . and . . ." 

"To tell you that, Sefior," answered the other, 
36 



The Man in Green 



with a certain sad pride, "involves merely telling 
you who I am. I am Juan del Fuego, President 
of Nicaragua." 

The manner with which the President of 
Nicaragua leant back and drank his sherry 
showed that to him this explanation covered 
all the facts observed and a great deal more. 
Barker's brow, however, was still a little 
clouded. 

"And the yellow paper," he began, with anxious 
friendliness, "and the red rag . . ." 

"The yellow paper and the red rag," said 
Fuego, with indescribable grandeur, "are the 
colours of Nicaragua." 

"But Nicaragua ..." began Barker, with 
great hesitation, "Nicaragua is no longer 
a . . ." 

"Nicaragua has been conquered like Athens. 
Nicaragua has been annexed like Jerusalem," 
cried the old man, with amazing fire. "The 
Yankee and the German and the brute powers 
of modernity have trampled it with the hoofs of 
oxen. But Nicaragua is not dead. Nicaragua is 
an idea." 
Auberon Quin suggested timidly, "A brilliant 
idea." 

"Yes," said the foreigner, snatching at the 
word. "You are right, generous Englishman, 

37 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 



An idea brilliant, a burning thought. Sefior, you 
asked me why, in my desire to see the colours 
of my country, I snatched at paper and blood. 
Can you not understand the ancient sanctity of 
colours? The Church has her symbolic colours. 
And think of what colours mean to us 
 think of the position of one like myself, 
who can see nothing but those two colours, nothing but the red and the yellow. To 
me all shapes are equal, all common and noble 
things are in a democracy of combination. 
Wherever there is a field of marigolds and the 
red cloak of an old woman, there is Nicaragua. 
Wherever there is a field of poppies and a 
yellow patch of sand, there is Nicaragua. 
Wherever there is a lemon and a red sunset, 
there is my country. Wherever I see a red 
pillar-box and a yellow sunset, there my heart 
beats. Blood and a splash of mustard can be my 
heraldry. If there be yellow mud and red mud 
in the same ditch, it is better to me than white 
stars." 

"And if," said Quin, with equal enthusiasm, 
"there should happen to be yellow wine and red 
wine at the same lunch, you could not confine 
yourself to sherry. Let me order some Burgundy, 
and complete, as it were, a sort of Nicaraguan 
heraldry in your inside." 

38 



1 



The Man in Green 



Barker was fiddling with his knife, and was 
evidently making up his mind to say something, 
with the intense nervousness of the amiable 
Englishman. 

"I am to understand, then," he said at last, 
with a cough, "that you, ahem, were the 
President of Nicaragua when it made its  er  
one must, of course, agree  its quite heroic resistance to  er  " 

The ex-President of Nicaragua waved his 
hand. 

"You need not hesitate in speaking to me," he 
said. "I am quite fully aware that the whole tendency of the world of to-day is against Nicaragua 
and against me. I shall not consider it any diminution of your evident courtesy if you say what 
you think of the misfortunes that have laid my 
republic in ruins." 

Barker looked immeasurably relieved and 
gratified. 

"You are most generous, President," he said, 
with some hesitation over the title, "and I will 
take advantage of your generosity to express the 
doubts which, I must confess, we moderns have 
about such things as  er  the Nicaraguan independence." 

"So your sympathies are," said Del Fuego, 
quite calmly, "with the big nation which  " 

39 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

"Pardon me, pardon me, President," said 
Barker, warmly; "my sympathies are with no 
nation. You misunderstand, I think, the 
modern intellect. We do not disapprove of the 
fire and extravagance of such commonwealths as 
yours only to become more extravagant on a 
larger scale. We do not condemn Nicaragua 
because we think Britain ought to be more 
Nicaraguan. We do not discourage small 
I  nationalities because we wish large nationalities 
V to have all their smallness, all their uniformity 
of outlook, all their exaggeration of spirit. 
If I differ with the greatest respect from 
your Nicaraguan enthusiasm, it is not because a 
nation or ten nations were against you; it is 
because civilisation was against you. We moderns 
believe in a great cosmopolitan civilisation, one 
which shall include all the talents of all the 
absorbed peoples  " 

"The Senor will forgive me' said the 
President. "May I ask the Senor how, under 
ordinary circumstances, he catches a wild 
horse ?" 

"I never catch a wild horse," replied Barker, 
with dignity. 

"Precisely," said the other; "and there ends 
your absorption of the talents. That is what I 
complain of your cosmopolitanism. When you 

40 



The Man in Green 



say you want all peoples to unite, you really 
mean that you want all peoples to unite to 
learn the tricks of your people. If the 
Bedouin Arab does not know how to read, 
some English missionary or schoolmaster must 
be sent to teach him to read, but no one ever 
says, 'This schoolmaster does not know how to 
ride on a camel; let us pay a Bedouin to teach 
him.' You say your civilisation will include 
all talents. Will it? Do you really mean to 
say that at the moment when the Esquimaux 
has learnt to vote for a County Council, you 
will have learnt to spear a walrus? I recur to 
the example I gave. In Nicaragua we had a 
way of catching wild horses  by lassooing the 
fore feet  which was supposed to be the best in 
South America. If you are going to include all 
the talents, go and do it. If not, permit me 
to say, what I have always said, that something went from the world when Nicaragua was 
civilised." 

"Something, perhaps, ,, replied Barker, "but 
that something a mere barbarian dexterity. I do 
not know that I could chip flints as well as a 
primeval man, but I know that civilisation can 
make these knives which are better, and I trust 
to civilisation." 

"You have good authority," answered the 
41 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

Nicaraguan. "Many clever men like you have 
trusted to civilisation. Many clever Babylonians, many clever Egyptians, many clever 
men at the end of Rome. Can you tell 
trie, in a world that is flagrant with the failures 
of civilisation, what there is particularly immortal 
about yours ?" 

"I think you do not quite understand, 
President, what ours is," answered Barker. 
"You judge it rather as if England was still a 
poor and pugnacious island; you have been 
long out of Europe. Many things have 
happened." 

"And what," asked the other, "would you call 
the summary of those things ?" 

"The summary of those things," answered 
Barker, with great animation, "is that we are 
rid of the superstitions, and in becoming so we 
have not merely become rid of the superstitions 
which have been most frequently and most 
enthusiastically so described. The superstition of big nationalities is bad, but the 
superstition of small nationalities is worse. The 
superstition of reverencing our own country is 
bad, but the superstition of reverencing other 
people's countries is worse. It is so everywhere, 
and in a hundred ways. The superstition 
of monarchy is bad, and the superstition of ari
42 



The Man in Green 



stocracy is bad, but the superstition of democracy 
is the worst of all." 

The old gentleman opened his eyes with some 
surprise. 

"Are you, then," he said, "no longer a democracy in England ?" 

Barker laughed. 

"The situation invites paradox," he said. "We 
are, in a sense, the purest democracy. We have 
become a despotism. Have you not noticed how 
continually in history democracy becomes despotism ? People call it the decay of democracy. It 
is simply its fulfilment. Why take the trouble 
to number and register and enfranchise all the 
innumerable John Robinsons, when you can take 
one John Robinson with the same intellect or lack 
of intellect as all the rest, and have done with it? 
The old idealistic republicans used to found democracy on the idea that all men were equally 
intelligent. Believe me, the sane and enduring 
democracy is founded on the fact that all men are 
equally idiotic. Why should we not choose out 
of them one as much as another? All 
that we want for Government is a man 
not criminal and insane, who can rapidly look 
over some petitions and sign some proclamations. 
To think what time was wasted in arguing 
about the House of Lords, Tories saying it 

43 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

ought to be preserved because it was clever, and 
Radicals saying it ought to be destroyed 
because it was stupid, and all the time no 
one saw that it was right because it was stupid, 
because that chance mob of ordinary men 
thrown there by accident of blood, were a 
great democratic protest against the Lower 
House, against the eternal insolence of the 
aristocracy of talents. We have established now 
in England, the thing towards which all systems 
have dimly groped, the dull popular despotism without illusions. We want one man at the 
head of our State, not because he is brilliant or virtuous, but because he is one 
man and not a chattering crowd. To avoid the 
possible chance of hereditary diseases or such 
things, we have abandoned hereditary monarchy. 
The King of England is chosen like a juryman 
upon an official rotation list. Beyond that the 
whole system is quietly despotic, and we have not 
found it raise a murmur." 

"Do you really mean," asked the President, 
incredulously, "that you choose any ordinary man 
that comes to hand and make him despot 
 that you trust to the chance of some alphabetical list. . . ." 

"And why not?" cried Barker. "Did not 
half the historical nations trust to the chance of 

44 



The Man in Green 



dt 



the eldest sons of eldest sons, and did not half 
of them get on tolerably well? To have 
a perfect system is impossible; to have a 
system is indispensable. All hereditary mon- \ 
archies were a matter of luck : so are 
alphabetical monarchies. Can you find a deep 
philosophical meaning in the difference between 
the Stuarts and the Hanoverians? Believe me, 
I will undertake to find a deep philosophical 
meaning in the contrast between the dark 
tragedy of the A's, and the solid success of the 
B's." ' 

"And you risk it?" asked the other. "Though 
the man may be a tyrant or a cynic or a 
criminal ?" 

"We risk it," answered Barker, with a perfect 
placidity. "Suppose he is a tyrant  he is still 
a check on a hundred tyrants. Suppose he is a 
cynic, it is to his interest to govern well. Suppose 
he is a criminal  by removing poverty and substituting power, we put a check on his criminality. 
In short, by substituting despotism we have put 
a total check on one criminal and a partial check 
on all the rest." 

The Nicaraguan old gentleman leaned over 
with a queer expression in his eyes. 

"My church, sir," he said, "has taught me to 
respect faith. I do not wish to speak with any 

45 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

disrespect of yours, however fantastic. But do 
you really mean that you will trust to the ordinary 
man, the man who may happen to come next, as a 
good despot ?" 

"I do," said Barker, simply. "He may not be 
a good man. But he will be a good despot. For 
when he comes to a mere business routine of 
government he will endeavour to do ordinary 
justice. Do we not assume the same thing in a 
jury?" 

The old President smiled. 

"I don't know," he said, "that I have any 
particular objection in detail to your excellent 
scheme of Government. My only objection is a 
quite personal one. It is, that if I were asked 
whether I would belong to it, I should ask first 
of all, if I was not permitted, as an alternative, 
to be a toad in a ditch. That is all. You cannot 
argue with the choice of the soul." 

"Of the soul," said Barker, knitting his brows, 
"I cannot pretend to say anything, but speaking 
in the interests of the public  " 

Mr. Auberon Quin rose suddenly to his 
feet. 

"If you'll excuse me, gentlemen," he said, 
"I will step out for a moment into the air." 

"I'm so sorry, Auberon," said Lambert, goodnaturedly; "do you feel bad?" 

46 



The Man in Green 



"Not bad exactly," said Auberon, with selfrestraint; "rather good, if anything. Strangely 
and richly good. The fact is I want to reflect a 
little on those beautiful words that have just been 
uttered. 'Speaking', yes, that was the phrase, 
'speaking in the interests of the public.' One 
cannot get the honey from such things without 
being alone for a little." 

"Is he really off his chump, do you think?" 
asked Lambert. 

The old President looked after him with queerly 
vigilant eyes. 

"He is a man, I think," he said, "who cares 
for nothing but a joke. He is a dangerous 
man." 

Lambert laughed in the act of lifting some 
maccaroni to his mouth. 

"Dangerous !" he said. "You don't know little 
Quin, sir !" 

"Every man is dangerous," said the old man 
without moving, "who cares only for one thing. 
I was once dangerous myself." 

And with a pleasant smile he finished his coffee 
and rose, bowing profoundly, passed out into the 
fog, which had again grown dense and sombre. 
Three days afterwards they heard that he had 
died quietly in lodgings in Soho. 



47 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 



Drowned somewhere else in the dark sea of 
fog was a little figure shaking and quaking, 
with what might at first sight have seemed 
terror or ague: but which was really that 
strange malady, a lonely laughter. He was 
repeating over and over to himself with a rich 
accent  "But speaking in the interests of the 
public. . . ." 



48 



Chapter III  The Hill of Humour 



I 



(("][" N a little square garden of yellow roses, 
beside the sea," said Auberon Quin, 
"there was a Nonconformist minister 
who had never been to Wimbledon. His 
family did not understand his sorrow or the 
strange look in his eyes. But one day they 
repented their neglect, for they heard that a body 
had been found on the shore, battered, but 
wearing patent leather boots. As it happened, 
it turned out not to be the minister at all. 
But in the dead man's pocket there was a return 
ticket to Maidstone." 

There was a short pause as Quin and his friends 
Barker and Lambert went swinging on through 
the slushy grass of Kensington Gardens. Then 
Auberon resumed. 

"That story," he said reverently, "is the test 
of humour." 

They walked on further and faster, wading 
through higher grass as they began to climb a 
slope. 

"I perceive," continued Auberon, "that you 
have passed the test, and consider the anecdote 
excruciatingly funny; since you say nothing. 
Only coarse humour is received with pot-house 

49 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

applause. The great anecdote is received in 
silence, like a benediction. You felt pretty benedicted, didn't you, Barker ?" 

"I saw the point," said Barker, somewhat 
loftily. 

"Do you know," said Quin, with a sort of idiot 
gaiety, "I have lots of stories as good as that. 
Listen to this one." 

And he slightly cleared his throat. 

"Dr. Poly carp was, as you all know, an 
unusually sallow bimetallist. There people 
of wide experience would say, 'There goes the 
sallowest bimetallist in Cheshire.' Once this was 
said so that he overheard it: it was said by an 
actuary, under a sunset of mauve and grey. 
Polycarp turned upon him. 'Sallow!' he cried 
fiercely, 'sallow! Qais Merit Gracchos de seditione querentes It was said that no actuary 
ever made game of Dr. Polycarp again." 

Barker nodded with a simple sagacity. Lambert only grunted. 

"Here is another," continued the insatiable 
Quin. "In a hollow of the grey-green hills of 
rainy Ireland, lived an old, old woman, whose 
uncle was always Cambridge at the Boat Race. 
But in her grey-green hollows, she knew nothing 
of this: she didn't know that there was a Boat 
Race. Also she did not know that she had an 

5 



The Hill of Humour 



uncle. She had heard of nobody at all, except 
of George the First, of whom she had heard (I 
know not why), and in whose historical 
memory she put her simple trust. And by and 
by, in God's good time, it was discovered that 
this uncle of hers was not really her uncle, and 
they came and told her so. She smiled 
through her tears, and said only, 'Virtue is its 
own reward " 

Again there was a silence, and then Lambert 
said  

"It seems a bit mysterious." 

"Mysterious !" cried the other. "The true 
humour is mysterious. Do you not realise the 
chief incident of the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries ?" 

"And what's that ?" asked Lambert, shortly. 

"It is very simple," replied the other. "Hitherto 
it was the ruin of a joke that people did not 
see it. Now it is the sublime victory of a joke 
that people do not see it. Humour, my friends, 
is the one sanctity remaining to mankind. It is 
the one thing you are thoroughly afraid of. Look 
at that tree." 

His interlocutors looked vaguely towards a 
beech that leant out towards them from the ridge 
of the hill. 

"If," said Mr. Quin, "I were to say that you 
5i 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

did not see the great truths of science exhibited 
by that tree, though they stared any man 
of inteHect in the face, what would you 
think or say? You would merely regard me 
as a pedant with some unimportant theory 
about vegetable cells. If I were to say that you 
did not see in that tree the vile mismanagement of local politics, you would dismiss 
me as a Socialist crank with some particular fad 
about public parks. If I were to say that you 
were guilty of the supreme blasphemy of looking at that tree and not seeing in it a new 
religion, a special revelation of God, you would 
simply say I was a mystic, and think no more 
about me. But if"  and he lifted a pontifical 
hand  "if I say that you cannot see the humour 
of that tree, and that I see the humour 
of it  my God! you will roll about at my 
feet." 

He paused a moment, and then resumed. 

"Yes; a sense of humour, a weird and 
delicate sense of humour, is the new religion of 
mankind! It is towards that men will strain 
themselves with the asceticism of saints. 
Exercises, spiritual exercises, will be set in it. It 
will be asked, 'Can you see the humour of this 
iron railing?' or 'Can you see the humour of 
this field of corn? Can you see the humour of 

52 



The Hill of Humour 



the stars? Can you see the humour of the sunsets ?' How often I have laughed myself to sleep 
over a violet sunset." 

"Quite so," said Mr. Barker, with an intelligent 
embarrassment. 

"Let me tell you another story. How often 
it happens that the M.P.'s for Essex are less 
punctual than one would suppose. The least 
punctual Essex M.P., perhaps, was James 
Wilson, who said, in the very act of plucking a 
poppy  " 

Lambert suddenly faced round and struck his 
stick into the ground in a defiant attitude. 

"Auberon," he said, "chuck it. I won't stand 
it. . It's all bosh." 

Both men stared at him, for there was something very explosive about the words, as if 
they had been corked up painfully for a long 
time. 

"You have," began Quin, "no" 

"I don't care a curse," said Lambert, violently, 
"whether I have 'a delicate sense of humour' or 
not. I won't stand it. It's all a confounded 
fraud. There's no joke in those infernal tales 
at all. You know there isn't as well as I 
do." 

"Well," replied Quin, slowly, "it is true that 
I, with my rather gradual mental processes, did 

S3 



The Napoleon of Nottmg Hill 

not see any joke in them. But the finer sense of 
Barker perceived it." 

Barker turned a fierce red, but continued to 
stare at the horizon. 

"You ass," said Lambert; "why can't you be 
like other people ? Why can't you say something 
really funny, or hold your tongue ? The man who 
sits on his hat in a pantomime is a long sight 
funnier than you are." 

Quin regarded him steadily. They had reached 
the top of the ridge and the wind struck their 
faces. 

"Lambert," said Auberon, "you are a great and 
good man, though I'm hanged if you look it. You 
are more. You are a great revolutionist or 
deliverer of the world, and I look forward to 
seeing you carved in marble between Luther 
and Danton, if possible in your present attitude, the hat slightly on one side. I said as I 
came up the hill that the new humour was the 
last of the religions. You have made it the last 
of the superstitions. But let me give you a very 
serious warning. Be careful how you ask 
me to do anything outre, to imitate the man 
in the pantomime, and to sit on my hat. Because 
I am a man whose soul has been emptied 
of all pleasures but folly. And for twopence I'd 
do it." 

54 



The Hill of Humour 



"Do it then," said Lambert, swinging his stick 
impatiently. "It would be funnier than the bosh 
you and Barker talk." 

Quin, standing on the top of the hill, stretched 
his hand out towards the main avenue of Kensington Gardens. 

"Two hundred yards away," he said, "are all 
your fashionable acquaintances with nothing on 
earth to do but to stare at each other and at 
us. We are standing upon an elevation under 
the open sky, a peak as it were of fantasy, a 
Sinai of humour. We are in a great pulpit or 
platform, lit up with sunlight, and half London 
can see us. Be careful how you suggest things 
to me. For there is in me a madness which goes 
beyond martyrdom, the madness of an utterly 
idle man." 

"I don't know what you are talking about," 
said Lambert, contemptuously. "I only know I'd 
rather you stood on your silly head, than talked 
so much." 

"Auberon! for goodness' sake ..." cried 
Barker, springing forward; but he was too late. 
Faces from all the benches and avenues were 
turned in their direction. Groups stopped 
and small crowds collected; and the sharp 
sunlight picked out the whole scene in blue 
green and black, like a picture in a child's toy
55 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

book. And on the top of the small hill Mr. 
Auberon Quin stood with considerable athletic 
neatness upon his head, and waved his patentleather boots in the air. 

"For God's sake, Quin, get up, and don't 
be an idiot," cried Barker, wringing his 
hands; "we shall have the whole town 
here." 

"Yes, get up, get up, man," said Lambert, 
amused and annoyed. "I was only fooling; get 
up." 

Auberon did so with a bound, and flinging his 
hat higher than the trees, proceeded to hop about 
on one leg with a serious expression. Barker 
stamped wildly. 

"Oh, let's get home, Barker, and leave him," 
said Lambert; "some of your proper and 
correct police will look after him. Here they 
come !" 

Two grave-looking men in quiet uniforms came 
up the hill towards them. One held a paper in 
his hand. 

"There he is, officer," said Lambert, cheerfully ; 
"we ain't responsible for him." 

The officer looked at the capering Mr. Quin 
with a quiet eye. 

"We have not come, gentlemen," he said, 
"about what I think you are alluding to. We 

56 



The Hill of Humour 



have come from head-quarters to announce the 
selection of His Majesty the King. It is the 
rule, inherited from the old regime, that the 
news should be brought to the new 
Sovereign immediately, wherever he is; so 
we have followed you across Kensington 
Gardens." 

Barker's eyes were blazing in his pale face. 
He was consumed with ambition throughout 
his life. With a certain dull magnanimity of 
the intellect he had really believed in the 
chance method of selecting despots. But this 
sudden suggestion, that the selection might 
have fallen upon him, unnerved him with 
pleasure. 

"Which of us," he began, and the respectful 
official interrupted him. 

"Not you, sir, I am sorry to say. If I 
may be permitted to say so, we know your 
services to the Government, and should be 
very thankful if it were. The choice has 
fallen . . ." 

"God bless my soul!" said Lambert, jumping 
back two paces. "Not me. Don't say I'm autocrat of all the Russias." 

"No, sir," said the officer, with a slight cough 
and a glance towards Auberon, who 
was at that moment putting his head 

57 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 



between his legs and making a noise like a 
cow; "the gentleman whom we have to 
congratulate seems at the moment  er  er  
occupied. " 

"Not Quin!" shrieked Barker, rushing up 
to him; "it can't be. Auberon, for God's sake 
pull yourself together. You've been made 
King!" 

With his head still upside down between his 
legs, Mr. Quin answered modestly  

"I am not worthy. I cannot reasonably claim 
to equal the great men who have previously 
swayed the sceptre of Britain. Perhaps the only 
peculiarity that I can claim is that I am probably 
the first monarch that ever spoke out his soul to 
the people of England with his head and 
body in this position. This may in some sense 
give me, to quote a poem that I wrote in my 
youth  . 

A nobler office on the earth 

Than valour, power of brain, or birth 

Could give the warrior kings of old. 

The intellect clarified by this posture  " 

Lambert and Barker made a kind of rush at 

him. 

"Don't you understand?" cried Lambert. 

"It's not a joke. They've really made you 

58 



The Hill of Humour 



King. By gosh! they must have rum 
taste," 

"The great Bishops of the Middle Ages," 
said Quin, kicking his legs in the air, as he was 
dragged up more or less upside down, 
"were in the habit of refusing the honour of 
election three times and then accepting it. A 
mere matter of detail separates me from those 
great men. I will accept the post three times and 
refuse it afterwards. Oh! I will toil for you, 
my faithful people! You shall have a banquet of 
humour." 

By this time he had been landed the right way 
up, and the two men were still trying in 
vain to impress him with the gravity of the 
situation. 

"Did you not tell me, Wilfrid Lambert," he 
said, "that I should be of more public value if 
I adopted a more popular form of humour ? And 
when should a popular form of humour be more 
firmly riveted upon me than now, when I have 
become the darling of a whole people? 
Officer," he continued, addressing the 
startled messenger, "are there no ceremonies to 
celebrate my entry into the city?" 

"Ceremonies," began the official, with embarrassment, "have been more or less neglected for 
some little time, and  " 

59 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

Auberon Quin began gradually to take off his 
coat. 

"All ceremony," he said, "consists in the 
reversal of the obvious. Thus men, when they 
wish to be priests or judges, dress up like women. 
Kindly help me on with this coat." And he held 
it out. 

"But, your Majesty," said the officer, after 
a moment's bewilderment and manipulation, 
"you're putting it on with the tails in 
front." 

"The reversal of the obvious," said the 
King, calmly, "is as near as we can come 
to ritual with our imperfect apparatus. Lead 
on." 

The rest of that afternoon and evening was 
to Barker and Lambert a nightmare, which they 
could not properly realise or recall. The King, 
with his coat on the wrong way, went towards 
the streets that were awaiting him, and the old 
Kensington Palace which was the Royal residence. As he passed small groups of men, 
the groups turned into crowds, and gave forth 
sounds which seemed strange in welcoming an 
autocrat. Barker walked behind, his brain 
reeling, and, as the crowds grew thicker and 
thicker, the sounds became more and more unusual. And when he had reached the great 

60 



The Hill of Humour 



market-place opposite the church, Barker knew 
that he had reached it, though he was roods 
behind, because a cry went up such as had 
never before greeted any of the kings of the 
earth. 



I 



U 



BOOK II 



Chapter I  The Charter of the Cities 

LAMBERT was standing bewildered outside the door of the King's apartments amid the scurry of astonishment and ridicule. He was just passing out 
into the street, in a dazed manner, when James 
Barker dashed by him. 

"Where are you going?" he asked. 

"To stop all this foolery, of course," 
replied Barker; and he disappeared into the 
room. 

He entered it headlong, slamming the door, 
and slapping his incomparable silk hat on the 
table. His mouth opened, but before he could 
speak, the King said  

"Your hat, if you please." 

Fidgetting with his fingers, and scarcely knowing what he was doing, the young politician held 
it out. 

The King placed it on his own chair, and sat 
on it. 

"A quaint old custom," he explained, smiling 
above the ruins. "When the King receives the 
representatives of the House of Barker, the hat 
of the latter is immediately destroyed in this manner. It represents the absolute finality of the 

65 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

act of homage expressed in the removal of it. 
It declares that never until that hat shall once 
more appear upon your head (a contingency 
which I firmly believe to be remote) shall the 
House of Barker rebel against the Crown of 
England." 

Barker stood with clenched fist, and shaking 

up. 

"Your jokes," he began, "and my property  " 
and then exploded with an oath, and 
stopped again. 

"Continue, continue," said the King, waving 
his hands. 

"What does it all mean?" cried the other, 
with a gesture of passionate rationality. "Are 
you mad?" 

"Not in the least," replied the King, pleasantly. 
"Madmen are always serious ; they go mad from 
lack of humour. You are looking serious yourself, James." 

"Why can't you keep it to your own private 
life?" expostulated the other. "You've got 
plenty of money, and plenty of houses now to 
play the fool in, but in the interests of this 
public" 

"Epigrammatic," said the King, shaking his 
finger sadly at him. "None of your daring 
scintillations here. As to why I don't do it in 

66 



The Charter of the Cities 



private, I rather fail to understand your question. 
The answer is of comparative limpidity. I don't 
do it in private, because it is funnier to do it in 
public. You appear to think that it would be 
amusing to be dignified in the banquet hall and 
in the street, and at my own fireside (I could 
procure a fireside) to keep the company in a 
roar. But that is what every one does. Every 
one is grave in public, and funny in private. 
My sense of humour suggests the reversal of 
this; it suggests that one should be funny in 
public, and solemn in private. I desire to make 
the State functions, parliaments, coronations, 
and so on, one roaring old-fashioned pantomime. But, on the other hand, I shut myself 
up alone in a small store-room for two hours a 
day, where I am so dignified that I come out 
quite ill." 

By this time Barker was walking up and down 
the room, his frock coat flapping like the black 
wings of a bird. 

"Well, you will ruin the country, that's all," he 
said shortly. 

"It seems to me," said Auberon, "that the 
tradition of ten centuries is being broken, and 
the House of Barker is rebelling against the 
Crown of England. It would be with regret (for 
I admire your appearance) that I should be 

67 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

obliged forcibly to decorate your head with the 
remains of this hat, but " 

"What I can't understand," said Barker, 
flinging up his fingers with a feverish American 
movement, "is why you don't care about anything 
else but your games." 

The King stopped sharply in the act of 
lifting the silken remnants, dropped them, 
and walked up to Barker, looking at him 
steadily. 

"I made a kind of vow," he said, "that I would 
not talk seriously, which always means answering 
silly questions. But the strong man will always 
be gentle with politicians. 

'The shape my scornful looks deride 
Required a God to form;' 

if I may so theologically express myself. And 
for some reason I cannot in the least understand, 
I feel impelled to answer that question of yours, 
and to answer it as if there were really 
such a thing in the world as a serious subject. 
You ask me why I don't care for anything else. 
Can you tell me, in the name of all the gods 
you don't believe in, why I should care for anything else ?" 

"Don't you realise common public necessities ?" 
cried Barker. "Is it possible that a man of your 

68 



The Charter of the Cities 



intelligence does not know that it is every one's 
interest  " 

"Don't you believe in Zoroaster? Is it possible 
that you neglect Mumbo- Jumbo ?" returned 
the King, with startling animation. "Does 
a man of your intelligence come to me 
with these damned early Victorian ethics? 
If, on studying my features and manner, you 
detect any particular resemblance to the Prince 
Consort, I assure you you are mistaken. 
Did Herbert Spencer ever convince you  did 
he ever convince anybody  Did he ever for one 
mad moment convince himself  that it must 
be to the interest of the individual to feel 
a public spirit? Do you believe that, if 
you rule your department badly, you stand any 
more chance, or one half of the chance, of being 
guillotined, that an angler stands, of being pulled 
into the river by a strong pike? Herbert \ 
Spencer refrained from theft for the same reason 
that he refrained from wearing feathers in his 
hair, because he was an English gentleman with 
different tastes. I am an English gentleman with 
different tastes. He liked philosophy. I like 
art. He liked writing ten books on the nature 
of human society. I like to see the Lord 
Chamberlain walking in front of me with 
a piece of paper pinned to his coat-tails. It is 

69 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

my humour. Are you answered? At any rate, 
I have said my last serious word to-day, and my 
last serious word I trust for the remainder of 
my life in this Paradise of Fools. The remainder 
of my conversation with you to-day, which 
I trust will be long and stimulating, I propose 
to conduct in a new language of my own 
by means of rapid and symbolic movements of 
the left leg. ,, And he began to pirouette 
slowly round the room with a preoccupied 
expression. 

Barker ran round the room after him, bombarding him with demands and entreaties. But 
he received no response except in the new 
language. He came out banging the door again, 
and sick like a man coming on shore. As 
he strode along the streets he found himself 
suddenly opposite Cicconani's restaurant, and 
for some reason there rose up before him 
the green fantastic figure of the Spanish 
General, standing, as he had seen him last, at 
the door with the words on his lips, "You 
cannot argue with the choice of the 
soii M 

The King came out from his dancing with the 
air of a man of business legitimately tired. He 
put on an overcoat, lit a cigar, and went out into 
the purple night. 

70 




MM king of the castle 1 



The Charter of the Cities 



"I will go," he said, "and mingle with the 
people." 

He passed swiftly up a street in the neighbourhood of Notting Hill, when suddenly he 
felt a hard object driven into his waistcoat. 
He paused, put up a single eye-glass, and 
beheld a boy with a wooden sword and a paper 
cocked hat, wearing that expression of awed 
satisfaction with which a child contemplates his 
work when he has hit some one very hard. The 
King gazed thoughtfully for some time at his 
assailant, and slowly took a note-book from his 
breast-pocket. 

"I have a few notes," he said, "for my 
dying speech;" and he turned over the leaves. 
"Dying speech for political assassination; 
ditto, if by former friend  h'm, h'm. 
Dying speech for death at hands of injured husband (repentant). Dying speech for same 
(cynical). I am not quite sure which meets the 
present. ..." 

"I'm the King of the Castle," said the boy, 
truculently, and very pleased with nothing in 
particular. 

The King was a kind-hearted man, and very 
fond of children, like all people who are fond of 
the ridiculous. 

"Infant," he said, "I'm glad you are so 
71 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

stalwart a defender of your old inviolate Notting 
Hill. Look up nightly to that peak, my child, 
where it lifts itself among the stars so ancient, 
so lonely, so unutterably Notting. So long as 
you are ready to die for the sacred mountain, 
even if it were ringed with all the armies of 
Bays water  " 

The King stopped suddenly, and his eyes 
shone. 

"Perhaps," he said, "perhaps the noblest of 
all my conceptions. A revival of the arrogance 
of the old mediaeval cities applied to our 
glorious suburbs. Clapham with a city guard. 
Wimbledon with a city wall. Surbiton tolling 
a bell to raise its citizens. West Hampstead 
going into battle with its own banner. It shall 
be done. I, the King, have said it." And 
hastily presenting the boy with half-a-crown, 
remarking, "For the war-chest of Notting 
Hill," he ran violently home at such a rate of 
speed that crowds followed him for miles. On 
reaching his study, he ordered a cup of coffee, 
and plunged into profound meditation upon the 
project. At length he called his favourite 
Equerry, Captain Bowler, for whom he had a 
deep affection, founded principally upon the shape 
of his whiskers. 

"Bowler," he said, "isn't there some society of 
72 



The Charter of the Cities 



historical research, or something of which I am 
an honorary member ?" 

"Yes, sir," said Captain Bowler, rubbing his 
nose, "you are a member of The Encouragers 
of Egyptian Renaissance and The Teutonic 
Tombs Club and The Society for the Recovery 
of London Antiquities and  " 

"That is admirable," said the King. "The 
London Antiquities does my trick. Go to the 
Society for the Recovery of London Antiquities 
and speak to their secretary, and their subsecretary, and their president, and their vicepresident, saying, The King of England is 
proud, but the honorary member of the Society 
for the Recovery of London Antiquities is 
prouder than kings. I should like to tell you of 
certain discoveries I have made touching the 
neglected traditions of the London boroughs. 
The revelations may cause some excitement, 
stirring burning memories and touching old 
wounds in Shepherd's Bush and Bayswater, in 
Pimlico and South Kensington. The King 
hesitates, but the honorary member is firm. 
I approach you invoking the vows of my initiation, the Sacred Seven Cats, the Poker of Perfection, and the Ordeal of the Indescribable 
Instant (forgive me if I mix you up with the 
Clan-na-Gael or some other club I belong to), 

73 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

and ask you to permit me to read a paper at 
your next meeting on the 'Wars of the London 
Boroughs.' Say all this to the Society, Bowler. 
Remember it very carefully, for it is most 
important, and I have forgotten it altogether, 
and send me another cup of coffee and some 
of the cigars that we keep for vulgar and 
successful people. I am going to write my 
paper." 

The Society for the Recovery of London 
Antiquities met a month after in a corrugated 
iron hall on the outskirts of one of the southern 
suburbs of London. A large number of people 
had collected there under the coarse and flaring 
gas-jets when the King arrived, perspiring and 
genial. On taking off his great-coat, he was 
perceived to be in evening dress, wearing the 
Garter. His appearance at the small table, 
adorned only with a glass of water, was received 
with respectful cheering. 

The chairman (Mr. Huggins) said that he was 
sure that they had all been pleased to listen to 
such distinguished lecturers as they had heard 
for some time past (hear, hear). Mr. Burton 
(hear, hear), Mr. Cambridge, Professor King 
(loud and continued cheers), our old friend Peter 
Jessop, Sir William White (loud laughter), 
and other eminent men, had done honour to 

74 



The Charter of the Cities 



their little venture (cheers). But there were 
other circumstances which lent a certain unique 
quality to the present occasion (hear, hear). So 
far as his recollection went, and in connection 
with the Society for the Recovery of London 
Antiquities it went very far (loud cheers), he 
did not remember that any of their lecturers had 
borne the title of King. He would therefore call 
upon King Auberon briefly to address the 
meeting. 

The King began by saying that this speech 
might be regarded as the first declaration of 
his new policy for the nation. "At this 
supreme hour of my life I feel that to no one 
but the members of the Society for the Recovery 
of London Antiquities can I open my heart 
(cheers). If the world turns upon my policy, 
and the storms of popular hostility begin 
to rise (no, no), I feel that it is here, with 
my brave Recoverers around me, that I 
can best meet them, sword in hand ,, (loud 
cheers). 

His Majesty then went on to explain that, now 
old age was creeping upon him, he proposed 



io ucvuic nis remaining sirengm iu ui inking about a keener sense of local patriotism .[~ 
in the various municipalities of London. How  



to devote his remaining strength to bring
municipalities 
few of them knew the legends of their own 

75 

 OF THE 

UNIVERSITY 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

boroughs ! How many there were who had never 
heard of the true origin of the Wink of 
Wandsworth! What a large proportion of the 
younger generation in Chelsea neglected to 
perform the old Chelsea Chuff! Pimlico no 
longer pumped the Pimlies. Battersea had forgotten the name of Blick. 

There was a short silence, and then a voice said 
"Shame." 

The King continued: "Being called, however unworthily, to this high estate, I have 
resolved that, so far as possible, this neglect shall 
cease. I desire no military glory. I lay claim 
to no constitutional equality with Justinian 
or Alfred. If I can go down to history as the 
man who saved from extinction a few old 
English customs, if our descendants can say 
it was through this man, humble as he was, that 
the Ten Turnips are still eaten in Fulham, and 
the Putney parish councillor still shaves one half 
of his head, I shall look my great fathers reverently but not fearfully in the face when I go down 
to the last house of Kings." 

The King paused, visibly affected, but collecting himself, resumed once more. 

"I trust that to very few of you, at least, I 
need dwell on the sublime origins of these legends. 
The very names of your boroughs bear wit
76 



The Charter of the Cities 



ncss to them. So long as Hammersmith is 
called Hammersmith, its people will live in 
the shadow of that primal hero, the Blacksmith, who led the democracy of the Broadway 
into battle till he drove the chivalry of 
Kensington before him and overthrew them 
at that place which in honour of the best blood 
of the defeated aristocracy is still called Kensington Gore. Men of Hammersmith will not 
fail to remember that the very name of Kensington originated from the lips of their hero. 
For at the great banquet of reconciliation held 
after the war, when the disdainful oligarchs 
declined to join in the songs of the men of the 
Broadway (which are to this day of a rude and 
popular character), the great Republican leader, 
with his rough humour, said the words which 
are written in gold upon his monument, Tittle 
birds that can sing and won't sing, must be made 
to sing So that the Eastern Knights were 
called Cansings or Kensings ever afterwards. 
But you also have great memories, O men 
of Kensington! You showed that you could 
sing, and sing great war-songs. Even after 
the dark day of Kensington Gore, history 
will not forget those three Knights who 
guarded your disordered retreat from Hyde 
Park (so called from your hiding there), those 

77 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

three Knights after whom Knightsbridge is 
named. Nor will it forget the day of your 
re-emergence, purged in the fire of calamity, 
cleansed of your oligarchic corruptions, when, 
sword in hand, you drove the Empire of Hammersmith back mile by mile, swept it past its 
own Broadway, and broke it at last in a battle 
so long and bloody that the birds of prey have 
left their name upon it. Men have called it, 
with austere irony, the Ravenscourt. I shall 
not, I trust, wound the patriotism of Bayswater, or the lonelier pride of Brompton, or 
that of any other historic township, by taking 
these two special examples. I select them, not 
because they are more glorious than the rest, 
but partly from personal association (I am 
myself descended from one of the three heroes 
of Knightsbridge), and partly from the consciousness that I am an amateur antiquarian, 
and cannot presume to deal with times and 
places more remote and more mysterious. It 
is not for me to settle the question between 
two such men as Professor Hugg and Sir 
William Whisky as to whether Notting Hill 
means Nutting Hill (in allusion to the rich 
woods which no longer cover it), or whether it 
is a corruption of Nothing-ill, referring to its 
reputation among the ancients as an Earthly 

78 



The Charter of the Cities 



Paradise. When a Podkins and a Jossy confess themselves doubtful about the boundaries 
of West Kensington (said to have been traced 
in the blood of Oxen), I need not be ashamed 
to confess a similar doubt. I will ask you to 
excuse me from further history, and to assist 
me with your encouragement in dealing with 
the problem which faces us to-day. Is this 
ancient spirit of the London townships to die out ? 
Are our omnibus conductors and policemen to lose 
altogether that light which we see so often in 
their eyes, the dreamy light of 

'Old unhappy far-off things 
And battles long ago' 

 to quote the words of a little-known poet 
who was a friend of my youth? I have resolved, as I have said, so far as possible, to 
preserve the eyes of policemen and omnibus 
conductors in their present dreamy state. For 
what is a state without dreams ? And the remedy 
I propose is as follows:  

"To-morrow morning at twenty-five minutes 
past ten, if Heaven spares my life, I purpose to 
issue a Proclamation. It has been the work of 
my life, and is about half finished. With the 
assistance of a whisky and soda, I shall conclude 
the other half to-night, and my people will 

79 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

receive it to-morrow. All these boroughs where 
you were born, and hope to lay your bones, shall 
be reinstated in their ancient magnificence,  
Hammersmith, Kensington, Bayswater, Chelsea, 
Battersea, Clapham, Balham, and a hundred 
others. Each shall immediately build a city 
wall with gates to be closed at sunset. Each 
shall have a city guard, armed to the teeth. 
Each shall have a banner, a coat-of-arms, and, 
if convenient, a gathering cry. I will not enter 
into the details now, my heart is too full. 
They will be found in the proclamation itself. 
You will all, however, be subject to enrolment 
in the local city guards, to be summoned together by a thing called the Tocsin, the meaning 
of which I am studying in my researches into 
history. Personally, I believe a tocsin to be 
some kind of highly paid official. If, therefore, 
any of you happen to have such a thing as a 
halberd in the house, I should advise you to practise with it in the garden." 

Here the King buried his face in his handkerchief and hurriedly left the platform, overcome 
by emotions. 

The members of the Society for the Recovery 
of London Antiquities rose in an indescribable 
state of vagueness. Some were purple with 
indignation; an intellectual few were purple with 

80 



The Charter of the Cities 



laughter; the great majority found their minds 
a blank. There remains a tradition that one pale 
face with burning blue eyes remained fixed upon 
the lecturer, and after the lecture a red-haired 
boy ran out of the room. 



Chapter II  The Council of the Provosts 

THE King got up early next morning 
and came down three steps at a 
time like a schoolboy. Having eaten 
his breakfast hurriedly, but with an appetite, 
he summoned one of the highest officials of 
the Palace, and presented him with a shilling. "Go and buy me," he said, "a shilling paint-box, which you will get, unless 
the mists of time mislead me, in a shop at the 
corner of the second and dirtier street that 
leads out of Rochester Row. I have already 
requested the Master of the Buckhounds to 
provide me with cardboard. It seemed to me 
(I know not why) that it fell within his 
department." 

The King was happy all that morning with 
his cardboard and his paint-box. He was 
engaged in designing the uniforms and 
coats-of-arms for the various municipalities 
of London. They gave him deep and no 
inconsiderable thought. He felt the responsibility. 

"I cannot think," he said, "why people should 
think the names of places in the country more 

82 



The Council of the Provosts 



poetical than those in London. Shallow 
romanticists go away in trains and stop in places 
called Hugmy-in-the-Hole, or Bumps-on-thePuddle. And all the time they could, if they 
liked, go and live at a place with the dim, 
divine name of St. John's Wood. I have 
never been to St. John's Wood. I dare 
not. I should be afraid of the innumerable night of fir trees, afraid to come upon 
a blood-red cup and the beating of the wings 
of the Eagle. But all these things can be 
imagined by remaining reverently in the Harrow 
train." 

And he thoughtfully retouched his design for 
the head-dress of the halberdier of St. John's 
Wood, a design in black and red, compounded 
of a pine tree and the plumage of an eagle. 
Then he turned to another card. "Let us 
think of milder matters," he said. "Lavender 
Hill! Could any of your glebes and combes 
and all the rest of it produce so fragrant an 
idea? Think of a mountain of lavender 
lifting itself in purple poignancy into the silver 
skies and filling men's nostrils with a new 
breath of life  a purple hill of incense. It is 
true that upon my few excursions of discovery 
on a halfpenny tram I have failed to hit the 
precise spot. But it must be there; some poet 

83 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

called it by its name. There is at least warrant 
enough for the solemn purple plumes (following 
the botanical formation of lavender) which I 
have required people to wear in the neighbourhood of Clapham Junction. It is so everywhere, 
after all. I have never been actually to Southfields, but I suppose a scheme of lemons and 
olives represent their austral instincts. I have 
never visited Parson's Green, or seen either the 
Green or the Parson, but surely the pale-green 
shovel-hats I have designed must be more or less 
in the spirit. I must work in the dark and 
let my instincts guide me. The great love I 
bear to my people will certainly save me from 
distressing their noble spirit or violating their 
great traditions." 

As he was reflecting in this vein, the door was 
flung open, and an official announced Mr. Barker 
and Mr. Lambert. 

Mr. Barker and Mr. Lambert were not particularly surprised to find the King sitting on the 
floor amid a litter of water-colour sketches. 
They were not particularly surprised because the 
last time they had called on him they had 
found him sitting on the floor, surrounded by 
a litter of children's bricks, and the time before 
surrounded by a litter of wholly unsuccessful 
attempts to make paper darts. But the trend of 

84 



The Council of the Provosts 



the royal infant's remarks, uttered from amid 
this infantile chaos, was not quite the same affair. 
For some time they let him babble on, conscious that his remarks meant nothing. And 
then a horrible thought began to steal over 
the mind of James Barker. He began to 
think that the King's remarks did not mean 
nothing. 

"In God's name, Auberorf," he suddenly 
volleyed out, startling the quiet hall, "you 
don't mean that you are really going to 
have these city guards and city walls and 
things?" 

"I am, indeed," said the infant, in a quiet 
voice. "Why shouldn't I have them? I have 
modelled them precisely on your political principles. Do you know what I've done, 
Barker? I've behaved like a true Barkerian. 
I've . . . but perhaps it won't interest you, the 
account of my Barkerian conduct." 

"Oh, go on, go on," cried Barker. 

"The account of my Barkerian conduct," said 
Auberon, calmly, "seems not only to interest, but 
to alarm you. Yet it is very simple. It 
merely consists in choosing all the provosts 
under any new scheme by the same principle 
by which you have caused the central despot 
to be appointed. Each provost, of each city, 

85 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

under my charter, is to be appointed by 
rotation. Sleep, therefore, my Barker, a rosy 
sleep." 

Barker's wild eyes flared. 

"But, in God's name, don't you see, Quin, 
that the thing is quite different? In the centre 
it doesn't matter so much, just because the 
whole object of despotism is to get some sort 
of unity. But if any damned parish can go to 
any damned man  " 

"I see your difficulty," said King Auberon, 
calmly. "You feel that your talents may be 
neglected. Listen!" And he rose with immense magnificence. "I solemnly give to my 
liege subject, James Barker, my special and 
splendid favour, the right to override the 
obvious text of the Charter of the Cities, and 
to be, in his own right, Lord High Provost of 
South Kensington. And now, my dear James, 
you are all right. Good day." 

"But" began Barker. 

"The audience is at an end, Provost," said the 
King, smiling. 

How far his confidence was justified, it would 
require a somewhat complicated description to 
explain. "The Great Proclamation of the 
Charter of the Free Cities" appeared in due 
course that morning, and was posted by bill
86 



The Council of the Provosts 



stickers all over the front of the Palace, the 
King assisting them with animated directions, 
and standing in the middle of the road, with his 
head on one side, contemplating the result. It 
was also carried up and down the main thoroughfares by sandwichmen, and the King was, with 
difficulty, restrained from going out in that 
capacity himself, being, in fact, found by the 
Groom of the Stole and Captain Bowler, 
struggling between two boards. His excitement had positively to be quieted like that of a v 

chi,<l - UtkC 

The reception which the Charter of the 



Cities met at the hands of the public may mildly 
be described as mixed. In one sense it was 
popular enough. In many happy homes that 
remarkable legal document was read aloud on 
winter evenings amid uproarious appreciation, 
when everything had been learnt by heart from 
that quaint but immortal old classic, Mr. W. 
W. Jacobs. But when it was discovered 
that the King had every intention of seriously 
requiring the provisions to be carried out, of 
insisting that the grotesque cities, with their 
tocsins and city guards, should really come 
into existence, things were thrown into a 
far angrier confusion. Londoners had no 
particular objection to the King making a 

87 



I 



\J 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

fool of himself, but they became indignant when it became evident that he 
wished to make fools of them; and protests 
began to come in. 

The Lord High Provost of the Good and 
Valiant City of West Kensington wrote a respectful letter to the King, explaining that upon 
State occasions it would, of course, be his duty 
to observe what formalities the King thought 
proper, but that it was really awkward for a 
decent householder not to be allowed to go out 
and put a post-card in a pillar-box without 
being escorted by five heralds, who announced, 
with formal cries and blasts of a trumpet, that 
the Lord High Provost desired to catch the 
post. 

The Lord High Provost of North Kensington, 
who was a prosperous draper, wrote a curt business note, like a man complaining of a railway 
company, stating that definite inconvenience 
had been caused him by the presence of the halberdiers, whom he had to take with him everywhere. When attempting to catch an omnibus to 
the City, he had found that while room could 
have been found for himself, the halberdiers had 
a difficulty in getting into the vehicle  believe 
him, theirs faithfully. 

The Lord High Provost of Shepherd's Bush 



The Council of the Provosts 

said his wife did not like men hanging round the 
kitchen. 

The King was always delighted to listen to 
these grievances, delivering lenient and kingly answers, but as he always insisted, as the absolute sine qua non, that verbal complaints should 
be presented to him with the fullest pomp of 
trumpets, plumes, and halberds, only a few resolute spirits were prepared to run the gauntlet of 
the little boys in the street. 

Among these, however, was prominent the 
abrupt and business-like gentleman who ruled 
North Kensington. And he had before long, 
occasion to interview the King about a matter 
wider and even more urgent than the problem 
of the halberdiers and the omnibus. This was 
the greatest question which then and for long 
afterwards brought a stir to the blood and a 
flush to the cheek of all the speculative builders 
and house agents from Shepherd's Bush to the 
Marble Arch, and from Westbourne Grove to 
High Street, Kensington. I refer to the great 
affair of the improvements in Notting Hill. 
The scheme was conducted chiefly by Mr. 
Buck, the abrupt North Kensington magnate, 
and by Mr. Wilson, the Provost of Bayswater. 
A great thoroughfare was to be driven through 
three boroughs, through West Kensington, 

89 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

North Kensington and Notting Hill, opening 
at one end into Hammersmith Broadway, and 
at the other into Westbourne Grove. The 
negotiations, buyings, sellings, bullying and 
bribing took ten years, and by the end of 
it Buck, who had conducted them almost 
single-handed, had proved himself a man of the 
strongest type of material energy and material 
diplomacy. And just as his splendid patience 
and more splendid impatience had finally brought 
him victory, when workmen were already demolishing houses and walls along the great line 
from Hammersmith, a sudden obstacle appeared 
that had neither been reckoned with nor dreamed 
of, a small and strange obstacle, which, like a 
speck of grit in a great machine, jarred the 
whole vast scheme and brought it to a standstill, and Mr. Buck, the draper, getting with 
great impatience into his robes of office and 
summoning with indescribable disgust his 
halberdiers, hurried over to speak to the 
King. 

Ten years had not tired the King of his joke. 
There were still new faces to be seen looking 
out from the symbolic head-gears he had 
designed, gazing at him from amid the pastoral 
ribbons of Shepherd's Bush or from under the 
sombre hoods of the Blackfriars Road. And the 

90 



The Council of the Provosts 



interview which was promised him with the 
Provost of North Kensington he anticipated 
with a particular pleasure, for "he never really 
enjoyed," he said, "the full richness of the 
mediaeval garments unless the people compelled 
to wear them were very angry and businesslike." 

Mr. Buck was both. At the King's command the door of the audience-chamber was 
thrown open and a herald appeared in the 
purple colours of Mr. Buck's commonwealth 
emblazoned with the Great Eagle which the 
King had attributed to North Kensington, in 
vague reminiscence of Russia, for he always V3'; 
insisted on regarding North Kensington as some J "Uiy 
kind of semi-arctic neighbourhood. The herald 
announced that the Provost of that city desired | 
audience of the King. 

"From North Kensington?" said the King, 
rising graciously. "What news does he bring 
from that land of high hills and fair women ? He 
is welcome." 

The herald advanced into the room, and was 
immediately followed by twelve guards clad in 
purple, who were followed by an attendant 
bearing the banner of the Eagle, who was 
followed by another attendant bearing the 
keys of the city upon a cushion, who was 

91 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

followed by Mr. Buck in a great hurry. 
When the King saw his strong animal face 
and steady eyes, he knew that he was in the 
presence of a great man of business, and consciously braced himself. 

"Well, well," he said, cheerily coming down 
two or three steps from a dais, and striking his 
hands lightly together, "I am glad to see you. 
Never mind, never mind. Ceremony is not 
everything. ,, 

"I don't understand your Majesty' said the 
Provost, stolidly. 

"Never mind, never mind," said the King, 
gaily. "A knowledge of Courts is by no means 
an unmixed merit; you will do it next time, no 
doubt." 

The man of business looked at him sulkily from 
under his black brows and said again without 
show of civility  

"I don't follow you." 

"Well, well," replied the King, good-naturedly, 
"if you ask me I don't mind telling you, 
not because I myself attach any importance to 
these forms in comparison with the Honest 
Heart. But it is usual  it is usual  that is 
all, for a man when entering the presence 
of Royalty to lie down on his back on 
the floor and elevating his feet towards heaven 

92 



The Council of the Provosts 



(as the source of Royal power) to say 
three times 'Monarchical institutions improve 
the manners But there, there  such pomp 
is far less truly dignified than your simple 
kindliness." 

The Provost's face was red with anger and he 
maintained silence. 

"And now," said the King, lightly, and with 
the exasperating air of a man softening a snub; 
"what delightful weather we are having! You 
must find your official robes warm, my Lord. 
I designed them for your own snow-bound 
land." 

"They're as hot as hell," said Buck, briefly. "I 
came here on business." 

"Right," said the King, nodding a great 
number of times with quite unmeaning solemnity; "right, right, right. Business, as the sad 
glad old Persian said, is business. Be punctual. 
Rise early. Point the pen to the shoulder. 
Point the pen to the shoulder, for you know 
not whence you come nor why. Point the pen 
to the shoulder, for you know not when you go 
nor where." 

The Provost pulled a number of papers 
from his pocket and savagely flapped them 
open. 

93 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

"Your Majesty may have heard," he began, 
sarcastically, "of Hammersmith and a thing 
called a road. We have been at work ten 
years buying property and getting compulsory 
powers and fixing compensation and squaring 
vested interests, and now at the very end, 
I the thing is stopped by a fool. Old Prout, 
who was Provost of Notting Hill, was a 
business man, and we dealt with him quite 
satisfactorily. But he's dead, and the cursed 
lot has fallen to a young man named Wayne, 
who's up to some game that's perfectly 
incomprehensible to me. We offer him a 
better price than any one ever dreamt of, but 
he won't let the road go through. And his 
Council seem to be backing him up. It's midsummer madness." 

The King, who was rather inattentively 
engaged in drawing the Provost's nose with 
his finger on the window-pane, heard the last two 
words. 

"What a perfect phrase that is," fie said. 
" 'Midsummer madness !' " 

"The chief point is," continued Buck, 
doggedly, "that the only part that is really 
in question is one dirty little street  Pump 
Street  a street with nothing in it but a public 
house and a penny toy-shop, and that sort of 

94 



The Council of the Provosts 



thing. All the respectable people of Notting Hill 
have accepted our compensation. But the ineffable Wayne sticks out over Pump Street. 
Says he's Provost of Notting Hill. He's only 
Pro vast of Pump Street." 

"A good thought," replied Auberon. " I like 
the idea of a Provost of Pump Street. Why not 
let him alone?" 

"And drop the whole scheme!" cried out 
Buck, with a burst of brutal spirit. 'Til be 
damned if we do. No. I'm for sending 
in workmen to pull down without more 
ado." 

"Strike for the purple Eagle," cried the King, 
hot with historical associations. 

"I'll tell you what it is," said Buck, losing 
his temper altogether. "If your Majesty 
would spend less time in insulting respectable people with your silly coats-ofarms, and more time over the business of 
the nation  " 

The King's brow wrinkled thoughtfully. 

"The situation is not bad," he said; "the 
haughty burgher defying the King in his own 
Palace. The burgher's head should be thrown 
back and the right arm extended; the left may 
be lifted towards Heaven, but that I leave to 
your private religious sentiment. I have sunk 

95 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

back in this chair, stricken with baffled fury. Now 
again, please." 

Buck's mouth opened like a dog's, but before 
he could speak another herald appeared at the 
door. 

"The Lord High Provost of Bayswater," he 
said, "desires an audience." 

"Admit him," said Auberon. "This is a jolly 
day." 

The halberdiers of Bayswater wore a prevailing uniform of green, and the banner which 
was borne after them was emblazoned with a 
green bay-wreath on a silver ground, which the 
King, in the course of his researches into a 
bottle of champagne, had discovered to be the 
quaint old punning cognisance of the city of 
Bayswater. 

"It is a fit symbol," said the King, "your immortal bay-wreath. Fulham may seek for 
wealth, and Kensington for art, but when 
did the men of Bayswater care for anything but 
glory?" 

Immediately behind the banner, and almost 
completely hidden by it, came the Provost of 
the city, clad in splendid robes of green and 
silver with white fur and crowned with bay. 
He was an anxious little man with red whiskers, 
originally the owner of a small sweet-stuff shop. 

96 



The Council of the Provosts 



"Our cousin of Bayswater," said the King, 
with delight; "what can we get for you?" 
The King was heard also distinctly to mutter, 
"Cold beef, cold 'am, cold chicken," his voice 
dying into silence. 

"I came to see your Majesty," said the Provost 
of Bayswater, whose name was Wilson, "about 
that Pump Street affair." 

"I have just been explaining the situation to 
his Majesty," said Buck, curtly, but recovering 
his civility. "I am not sure, however, whether 
his Majesty knows how much the matter affects 
you also." 

"It affects both of us, yer see, yer Majesty, as 
this scheme was started for the benefit of the 'ole 
neighbourhood. So Mr. Buck and me we put our 
'eads together  " 

The King clasped his hands. 

"Perfect," he cried in ecstacy. "Your heads 
together ! I can see it ! Can't you do it now ? Oh, 
do do it now." 

A smothered sound of amusement appeared to 
come from the halberdiers, but Mr. Wilson 
looked merely bewildered, and Mr. Buck merely 
diabolical. 

"I suppose," he began, bitterly, but the 
King stopped him with a gesture of listening. 

97 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

"Hush," he said, "I think I hear some one else 
coming. I seem to hear another herald, a herald 
whose boots creak.' ' 

As he spoke another voice cried from the doorway  

"The Lord High Provost of South Kensington 
desires an audience." 

"The Lord High Provost of South Kensington!" cried the King. "Why, that is my 
old friend James Barker ! What does he want 
I wonder? If the tender memories of friendship 
have not grown misty, I fancy he wants something for himself, probably money. How are you, 
James ?" 

Mr. James Barker, whose guard was attired 
in a splendid blue, and whose blue banner 
bore three gold birds singing, rushed, in 
his blue and gold robes, into the room. 
Despite the absurdity of all the dresses, 
it was worth noticing that he carried his 
better than the rest, though he loathed it as 
much as any of them. He was a gentleman, and a very handsome man, and could 
not help unconsciously wearing even his 
preposterous robe as it should be worn. 
He spoke quickly, but with the slight 
initial hesitation he always showed in addressing the King, due to suppressing an impulse 

98 



The Council of the Provosts 



to address his old acquaintance in the old 
way. 

"Your Majesty  pray forgive my intrusion. 
It is about this man at Pump Street. I see you 
have Buck here, so you have probably heard what 
is necessary. I  " 

The King swept his eyes anxiously round the 
room, which now blazed with the trappings of 
three cities. 

"There is one thing necessary," he said. 

"Yes, your Majesty," said Mr. Wilson of Bayswater, a little eagerly. "What does yer Majesty 
think necessary?" 

"A little yellow," said the king, firmly. 
"Send for the Provost of West Kensington." 

Amid some materialistic protests he was 
sent for and arrived with his yellow halberdiers in his saffron robes, wiping his forehead with a handkerchief. After all, placed 
as he was, he had a good deal to say on 
the matter. 

"Welcome, West Kensington," said the 
King. "I have long wished to see you, touching that matter of the Hammersmith land to 
the south of the Rowton House. Will you 
hold it feudally from the Provost of Hammersmith? You have only to do him homage by 

99 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 



putting his left arm in his overcoat and then 
marching home in state." 

"No, your Majesty; I'd rather not," 
said the Provost of West Kensington, who 
was a pale young man with a fair moustache and whiskers, who kept a successful 
dairy. 

The King struck him heartily on the 
shoulder. 

"The fierce old West Kensington blood," 
he said; "they are not wise who ask it to do 
homage." 

Then he glanced again round the room. It 
was full of a roaring sunset of colour, and he 
enjoyed the sight, possible to so few artists  
the sight of his own dreams moving and 
blazing before him. In the foreground the 
yellow of the W T est Kensington liveries outlined itself against the dark blue draperies of 
South Kensington. The crests of these again 
brightened suddenly into green as the almost 
woodland colours of Bayswater rose behind 
them. And over and behind all, the great 
purple plumes of North Kensington showed 
almost funereal and black. 

"There is something lacking," said the King, 
"something lacking. What can  Ah, there it is ! 
there it is !" 

100 



The Council of the Provosts 






In the doorway had appeared a new figure, a 
herald in flaming red. He cried in a loud but 
unemotional voice  

"The Lord High Provost of Notting Hill desires an audience." 



IOI 



Chapter III  Enter a Lunatic 

THE King of the Fairies, who was, it is 
to be presumed, the godfather of King 
Auberon, must have been very favourable on this particular day to his fantastic 
godchild, for with the entrance of the guard 
of the Provost of Notting Hill there was 
a certain more or less inexplicable addition 
to his delight. The wretched navvies and 
sandwich-men who carried the colours of 
Bayswater or South Kensington, engaged 
merely for the day to satisfy the Royal 
hobby, slouched into the room with a comparatively hang-dog air, and a great part of the 
King's intellectual pleasure consisted in the 
contrast between the arrogance of their swords 
and feathers and the meek misery of their 
faces. But these Notting Hill halberdiers in 
their red tunics belted with gold had the 
air rather of an absurd gravity. They 
seemed, so to speak, to be taking part in 
the joke. They marched and wheeled into 
position with an almost startling dignity and discipline. 

They carried a yellow banner with a great 
red lion, named by the King as the Notting 

102 



Enter a Lunatic 



Hill emblem, after a small public-house in the 
neighbourhood, which he once frequented. 

Between the two lines of his followers there 
advanced towards the King a tall, red-haired 
young man, with high features, and bold blue 
eyes. He would have been called handsome, 
but that a certain indefinable air of his nose 
being too big for his face, and his feet for his 
legs, gave him a look of awkwardness and 
extreme youth. His robes were red, according 
to the King's heraldry, and alone among the 
Provosts, he was girt with a great sword. This 
was Adam Wayne, the intractable Provost ofv 
Notting Hill. 

The King flung himself back in his chair, and 
rubbed his hands. 

"What a day, what a day!" he said to himself. 
"Now there'll be a row. I'd no idea it would 
be such fun as it is. These Provosts are so very 
indignant, so very reasonable, so very right. This 
fellow, by the look in his eyes, is even more 
indignant than the rest. No sign in those 
large blue eyes, at any rate, of ever having 
heard of a joke. He'll remonstrate with the 
others, and they'll remonstrate with him, and 
they'll all make themselves sumptuously happy 
remonstrating with me." 

"Welcome, my Lord," he said aloud. "What 
103 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

news from the Hill of a Hundred Legends? 
What have you for the ear of your King? 
I know that troubles have arisen between you 
and these others, our cousins, but these 
troubles it shall be our pride to compose. And 
I doubt not, and cannot doubt, that your love 
for me is not less tender, no less ardent than 
theirs." 

Mr. fluck made a bitter face, and James 
Barker's nostrils curled; Wilson began to 
giggle faintly, and the Provost of West Kensington followed in a smothered way. But the 
big blue eyes of Adam Wayne never changed, 
and he called out in an odd, boyish voice down 
the hall 

"I bring homage to my King. I bring him the 
only thing I have  my sword." 

And with a great gesture he flung it down 
on the ground, and knelt on one knee behind 
it. 

There was a dead silence. 

"I beg your pardon," said the King, blankly. 

"You speak well, sire," said Adam Wayne, 
"as you ever speak, when you say that my love 
is not less than the love of these. Small would 
it be if it were not more. For I am the heir of 
your scheme  the child of the great Charter. 
I stand here for the rights the Charter gave me, 

104 




"I BRING HOMAGE TO MY KING 



Enter a Lunatic 



and I swear, by your sacred crown, that where I 
stand, I stand fast." 

The eyes of all five men stood out of their 
heads. 

Then Buck said, in his jolly, jarring voice : "Is 
the whole world mad?" 

The King sprang to his feet, and his eyes 
blazed. 

"Yes," he cried, in a voice of exultation, 
"the whole world is mad, but Adam Wayne 
and me. It is true as death what I told you 
long ago, James Barker, seriousness sends men 
mad. You are mad, because you care for 
politics, as mad as a man who collects tram 
tickets. Buck is mad, because he cares for 
money, as mad as a man who lives on opium. 
Wilson is mad, because he thinks himself right, 
as mad as a man who thinks himself God 
Almighty. The Provost of West Kensington 
is mad, because he thinks he is respectable, as 
mad as a man who thinks he is a chicken. All 
men are mad, but the humourist, who cares for 
nothing and possesses everything. I thought; 
that there was only one humourist in EnglandJ 
Fools!  dolts!  open your cows' eyes; there 
are two! In Notting Hill  in that unpromising elevation  there has been born an artist! 
You thought to spoil my joke, and bully me out 

ios 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

of it, by becoming more and more modern, more 
and more practical, more and more bustling 
and rational. Oh, what a feast it was to answer 
you by becoming more and more august, 
more and more gracious, more and more ancient 
and mellow ! But this lad has seen how to bowl 
me out. He has answered me back, vaunt for 
vaunt, rhetoric for rhetoric. He has lifted 
the only shield I cannot break, the shield 
of an impenetrable pomposity. Listen to him. 
You have come, my Lord, about Pump 
Street?" 

"About the city of Notting Hill," answered 
Wayne, proudly. "Of which Pump Street is a 
living and rejoicing part." 

"Not a very large part," said Barker, contemptuously. 

"That which is large enough for the rich to 
covet," said Wayne, drawing up his head, "is 
large enough for the poor to defend." 

The King slapped both his legs, and waved his 
feet for a second in the air. 

"Every respectable person in Notting Hill," 
cut in Buck, with his cold, coarse voice, "is for 
us and against you. I have plenty of friends in 
Notting Hill." 

"Your friends are those who have taken your 
gold for other men's hearthstones, my Lord 

106 



Enter a Lunatic 



Buck," said Provost Wayne. "I can well believe 
they are your friends.'' 

"They've never sold dirty toys, anyhow," said 
Buck, laughing shortly. 

"They've sold dirtier things," said Wayne, 
calmly; "they have sold themselves." 

"It's no good, my Buckling," said the King, 
rolling about on his chair. "You can't cope 
with this chivalrous eloquence. You can't cope 
with an artist. You can't cope with the 
humourist of Notting Hill. O, Nunc dimittis  
that I have lived to see this day ! Provost Wayne, 
you stand firm?" 

"Let them wait and see," said Wayne. "If 
I stood firm before, do you think I shall weaken 
now that I have seen the face of the King? 
For I fight for something greater, if greater 
there can be, than the hearthstones of my 
people and the Lordship of the Lion. I fight for 
your royal vision, for the great dream you 
dreamt of the League of the Free Cities. You 
have given me this liberty. If I had been a 
beggar and you had flung me a coin, if I had 
been a peasant in a dance and you had flung 
me a favour, do you think I would have let it 
be taken by any ruffians on the road? This 
leadership and liberty of Notting Hill is a gift 
from your Majesty. And if it is taken from 

107 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

me, by God! it shall be taken in battle, and 
the noise of that battle shall be heard in the 
flats of Chelsea and in the studios of St. John's 
Wood." 

"It is too much  it is too much," said the 
King. "Nature is weak. I must speak to 
you, brother artist, without further disguise. 
Let me ask you a solemn question. Adam 
Wayne, Lord High Provost of Notting Hill, 
don't you think it splendid?" 

"Splendid !" cried Adam Wayne. "It has the 
splendour of God." 

"Bowled out again," said the King. "You will 
keep up the pose. Funnily, of course, it is serious. 
But seriously, isn't it funny?" 

"What?" asked Wayne, with the eyes of a 
baby. 

"Hang it all, don't play any more. The whole 
business  the Charter of the Cities. Isn't it immense?" 

"Immense is no unworthy word for that glorious design." 

"Oh, hang you  but, of course, I see. You 
want me to clear the room of these reasonable 
sows. You want the two humourists alone 
together. Leave us, gentlemen." 

Buck threw a sour look at Barker, and at a 
sullen signal the whole pageant of blue and green, 

108 



Enter a Lunatic 



of red, gold and purple rolled out of the 
room, leaving only two in the great hall, the King 
sitting in his seat on the dais, and the red-clad 
figure still kneeling on the floor before his fallen 
sword. 

The King bounded down the steps and smacked 
Provost Wayne on the back. 

"Before the stars were made," he cried, "we 
were made for each other. It is too beautiful. 
Think of the valiant independence of Pump Street. 
That is the real thing. It is the deification of the 
ludicrous." 

The kneeling figure sprang to his feet with a 
fierce stagger. 

"Ludicrous !" he cried, with a fiery face. 

"Oh come, come," said the King, impatiently. 
"You needn't keep it up with me. The augurs 
must wink sometimes from sheer fatigue of the 
eyelids. Let us enjoy this for half an hour, not 
as actors, but as dramatic critics. Isn't it a joke?" 

Adam Wayne looked down like a boy, and 
answered in a constrained voice  

"I do not understand your Majesty. I cannot 
believe that while I fight for your royal charter 
your Majesty deserts me for these dogs of. the 
gold hunt." 

"Oh, damn your But what's this ? What the 
devil's this?" 

109 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

The King stared into the young Provost's 
face, and in the twilight of the room began 
to see that his face was quite white and his lip 
shaking. 

"What in God's name is the matter?" cried 
Auberon, holding his wrist. 

Wayne flung back his face, and the tears were 
shining on it. 

"I am only a boy," he said, "but it's true. I 
would paint the Red Lion on my shield if I had 
only my blood." 

King Auberon dropped the hand and stood 
without stirring, thunderstruck. 

"My God in Heaven!" he said; "is it 
possible that there is within the four seas of 
Britain a man who takes Notting Hill seriously?" 

"And my God in Heaven!" said Wayne passionately; "is it possible that there is within the 
four seas of Britain a man who does not take it 
seriously ?" 

The King said nothing, but merely went 
back up the steps of the dais, like a man dazed. 
He fell back in his chair again and kicked his 
heels. 

"If this sort of thing is to go on," he said 
weakly, "I shall begin to doubt the superiority 
of art to life. In Heaven's name, do not play 



Enter a Lunatic 



with me. Do you really mean that you are  
God help me!  a Notting Hill patriot  that you 
are" 

Wayne made a violent gesture, and the King 
soothed him wildly. 

"All right  all right  I see you are; but let 
me take it in. You do really propose to 
fight these modern improvers with their boards 
and inspectors and surveyors and all the rest 
of it" 

"Are they so terrible?" asked Wayne, scornfully. 

The King continued to stare at him as if he 
were a human curiosity. 

"And I suppose," he said, "that you think that 
the dentists and small tradesmen and maiden 
ladies who inhabit Notting Hill, will rally with 
war-hymns to your standard ?" 

"If they have blood they will," said the 
Provost. 

"And I suppose," said the King, with his head 
back among the cushions, "that it never 
crossed your mind that"  his voice seemed to 
lose itself luxuriantly  "never crossed your mind 
that any one ever thought that the idea of a 
Notting Hill idealism was  er  slightly  slightly 
ridiculous." 

"Of course they think so," said Wayne, 
in 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

"What was the meaning of mocking the 
prophets ?" 

"Where?" asked the King, leaning forward. 
"Where in Heaven's name did you get this miraculously inane idea?" 

"You have been my tutor, Sire," said the 
Provost, "in all that is high and honourable." 

"Eh?" said the King. 

"It was your Majesty who first stirred my dim 
patriotism into flame. Ten years ago, when I 
was a boy (I am only nineteen), I was playing 
on the slope of Pump Street, with a wooden 
sword and a paper helmet, dreaming of great 
wars. In an angry trance I struck out with 
my sword and stood petrified, for I saw that I 
had struck you, Sire, my King, as you wandered 
in a noble secrecy, watching over your people's 
welfare. But I need have had no fear. Then 
was I taught to understand Kingliness. You 
neither shrank nor frowned. You summoned 
no guards. You invoked no punishments. 
But in august and burning words, which are 
written in my soul, never to be erased, you 
told me ever to turn my sword against the 
enemies of my inviolate city. Like a priest 
pointing to the altar, you pointed to the hill of 
Notting. 'So long you said, 'as you are 

112 



Enter a Lunatic 



ready to die for the sacred mountain, even if it 
were ringed with all the armies of Bayswater.' 
I have not forgotten the words, and I have 
reason now to remember them, for the hour is 
come and the crown of your prophecy. The sacred 
hill is ringed with the armies of Bayswater, and 
I am ready to die." 

The King was lying back in his chair, a kind of 
wreck. 

"O Lord, Lord, Lord," he murmured, "what 
a life! what a life! All my work! I 
seem to have done it all. So you're the redhaired boy that hit me in the waistcoat. What 
have I done? God, what have I done? I 
thought I would have a joke, and I have 
created a passion. I tried to compose a 
burlesque, and it seems to be turning halfway 
through into an epic. What is to be done 
with such a world? In the Lord's name, 
wasn't the joke broad and bold enough? I 
abandoned my subtle humour to amuse you, and 
I seem to have brought tears to your eyes. What's 
to be done with people when you write a 
pantomime for them  call the sausages classic 
festoons, and the policeman cut in two a tragedy 
of public duty? But why am I talking? Why 
am T asking questions of a nice young gentleman who is totally mad ? What is the good of it ? 

113 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

What is the good of anything? O Lord, O 
Lord!" 

Suddenly he pulled himself upright. 

"Don't you really think the sacred Notting Hill 
at all absurd ?" 

"Absurd?" asked Wayne, blankly. "Why 
should I?" 

The King stared back equally blankly. 

"I beg your pardon ?" he said. 

"Notting Hill," said the Provost, simply, "is 
a rise or high ground of the common earth, on 
which men have built houses to live, in which they 
are born, fall in love, pray, marry, and die. Why 
should I think it absurd?" 

The King smiled. 

"Because, my Leonidas  " he began, then 
suddenly, he knew not how, found his mind 
was a total blank. After all, why was it 
absurd? Why was it absurd? He felt as 
if the floor of his mind had given way. He felt 
as all men feel when their first principles are 
hit hard with a question. Barker always 
felt so when the King said, "Why trouble about 
politics ?" 

The King's thoughts were in a kind of rout; 
he could not collect them. 

"It is generally felt to be a little funny," he 
said, vaguely. 

114 



Enter a Lunatic 



"I suppose' said Adam, turning on him with 
a fierce suddenness, "I suppose you fancy crucifixion was a serious affair?" 

"Well, I " began Auberon, "I admit I 
have generally thought it had its graver 
side." 

"Then you are wrong," said Wayne, with 
incredible violence. "Crucifixion is comic. It 
is exquisitely diverting. It was an absurd and 
obscene kind of impaling reserved for people who 
were made to be laughed at  for slaves and provincials  for dentists and small tradesmen, as you 
would say. I have seen the grotesque gallowsshape, which the little Roman gutter-boys 
scribbled on walls as a vulgar joke, blazing 
on the pinnacles of the temples of the world. And 
shall I turn back?" 

The King made no answer. 

Adam went on, his voice ringing in the 
roof. 

"This laughter with which men tyrannise is 
not the great power you think it. Peter was 
crucified, and crucified head downwards. 
What could be funnier than the idea of a 
respectable old Apostle upside down? What 
could be more in the style of your modern 
humour? But what was the good of it? 
Upside down or right side up, Peter was Peter 

"5 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

to mankind. Upside down he still hangs over 
Europe, and millions move and breathe only in 
the life of his church." 

King Auberon got up absently. 

"There is something in what you say," he 
said. "You seem to have been thinking, young 
man." 

"Only feeling, sire," answered the Provost. "I 
was born, like other men, in a spot of the 
earth which I loved because I had played boys' 
games there, and fallen in love, and talked with 
my friends through nights that were nights of 
the gods. And I feel the riddle. These 
little gardens where we told our loves. These 
streets where we brought out our dead. Why 
should they be commonplace? Why should 
they be absurd ? Why should it be grotesque 
to say that a pillar-box is poetic when for a 
year I could not see a red pillar-box against the 
yellow evening in a certain street without being 
wracked with something of which God keeps 
the secret, but which is stronger than sorrow or 
joy? Why should any one be able to 
raise a laugh by saying 'the Cause of Notting 
Hill'?  Notting Hill where thousands of 
immortal spirits blaze with alternate hope and 
fear." 

Auberon was flicking dust off his sleeve with 
116 



Enter a Lunatic 



quite a new seriousness on his face, distinct from 
the owlish solemnity which was the pose of his 
humour. 

"It is very difficult, ,, he said at last "It 
is a damned difficult thing. I see what you 
mean  I agree with you even up to a point 
 or I should like to agree with you, if 
I were young enough to be a prophet 
and poet. I feel a truth in everything you 
say until you come to the words 'Notting 
Hill.' And then I regret to say that the old 
Adam awakes roaring with laughter and makes 
short work of the new Adam, whose name is 
Wayne" 

For the first time Provost Wayne was silent, 
and stood gazing dreamily at the floor. Evening was closing in, and the room had grown 
darker. 

"I know," he said, in a strange, almost 
sleepy voice, "there is truth in what you say, 
too. It is hard not to laugh at the common 
names  I only say we should not. I have 
thought of a remedy ; but such thoughts are rather 
terrible." 

"What thoughts?" asked Auberon. 

The Provost of Notting Hill seemed to have 
fallen into a kind of trance; in his eyes was an 
elvish light. 

"7 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

"1 know of a magic wand, but it is a wand 
that only one or two may rightly use, and only 
seldom. It is a fairy wand of great fear, stronger 
than those who use it  often frightful, often 
wicked to use. But whatever is touched with 
it is never again wholly common. Whatever 
is touched with it takes a magic from outside 
the world. If I touch, with this fairy wand, 
the railways and the roads of Notting Hill, 
men will love them, and be afraid of them for 
ever." 

"What the devil are you talking about?" asked 
the King. 

"It has made mean landscapes magnificent, 
and hovels outlast cathedrals," went on the 
madman. "Why should it not make lampposts fairer than Greek lamps, and an 
omnibus ride like a painted ship? The 
touch of it is the finger of a strange perfection." 

"What is your wand?" cried the King, impatiently. 

"There it is," said Wayne; and pointed 
to the floor, where his sword lay flat and 
shining. 

"The sword!" cried the King; and sprang up 
straight on the dai's. 

"Yes, yes," cried Wayne, hoarsely. "The 
118 



Enter a Lunatic 



things touched by that are not vulgar. The things 
touched by that  " 

King Auberon made a gesture of horror. 

"You will shed blood for that !" he cried. "For 
a cursed point of view  n 

"Oh, you kings, you kings," cried out Adam, 
in a burst of scorn. "How humane you are, how 
tender, how considerate. You will make war 
for a frontier, or the imports of a foreign harbour; you will shed blood for the precise duty 
on lace, or the salute to an admiral. But for 
the things that make life itself worthy or 
miserable  how humane you are. I say here, 
and I know well what I speak of, there were 
never any necessary wars but the religious 
wars. There were never any just wars but 
the religious wars. There were never any 
humane wars but the religious wars. For 
these men were fighting for something that 
claimed, at least, to be the happiness of a 
man, the virtue of a man. A Crusader 
thought, at least, that Islam hurt the soul of every 
man, king or tinker, that it could really capture. I think Buck and Barker and these 
rich vultures hurt the soul of every man, hurt 
every inch of the ground, hurt every brick of the 
houses, that they can really capture. Do you 
think I have no right to fight for Notting Hill, 

119 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

you whose English Government has so often 
fought for tomfooleries? If, as your rich 
friends say, there are no gods, and the skies 
are dark above us, what should a man fight for, 
but the place where he had the Eden of 
childhood and the short heaven of first love? If 
no temples and no scriptures are sacred, 
what is sacred if a man's own youth is 
not sacred ?" 

The King walked a little restlessly up and down 
the dais. 

"It is hard," he said, biting his lips, "to 
assent to a view so desperate  so responsible . . ." 

As he spoke, the door of the audience chamber 
fell ajar, and through the aperture came, like the 
sudden chatter of a bird, the high, nasal, but wellbred voice of Barker. 

"I said to him quite plainly  the public interests" 

Auberon turned on Wayne with violence. 

"What the devil is all this? What am I 
saying? What are you saying? Have you 
hypnotised me? Curse your uncanny blue 
eyes! Let me go. Give me back my sense 
of humour. Give it me back. Give it me back, 
I say!" 

"I solemnly assure you," said Wayne, uneasily, 
1 20 



Enter a Lunatic 



with a gesture, as if feeling all over himself, "that 
I haven't got it." 

The King fell back in his chair, and went into 
a roar of Rabelaisian laughter. 

"I don't think you have," he cried. 



131 



BOOK III 



Chapter I  The Mental Condition of 
Adam Wayne 

A LITTLE while after the King's accession a small book of poems appeared, 
called "Hymns on the Hill." They 
were not good poems, nor was the book 
successful, but it attracted a certain amount 
of attention from one particular school of V 
critics. The King himself, who was a member of the school, reviewed it in his capacity 
of literary critic to "Straight from the 
Stables," a sporting journal. They were known 
as the Hammock School, because it had been calculated malignantly by an enemy that no less 
than thirteen of their delicate criticisms had 
begun with the words, "I read this book in a 
hammock: half asleep in the sleepy sunlight, 
I . . . "; after that there were important 
differences. Under these conditions they liked 
everything, but especially everything silly. 
"Next to authentic goodness in a book," they 
said  "next to authentic goodness in a book 
(and that, alas! we never find) we desire a rich 
badness." Thus it happened that their praise 
(as indicating the presence of a rich badness) 
was not universally sought after, and authors 

125 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

became a little disquieted when they found the 
eye of the Hammock School fixed upon them with 
peculiar favour. 

The peculiarity of "Hymns on the Hill" 
was the celebration of the poetry of London as 
distinct from the poetry of the country. This 
sentiment or affectation, was of course, not uncommon in the twentieth century, nor was it, 
although sometimes exaggerated, and sometimes 
artificial, by any means without a great truth 
at its root, for there is one respect in which 
a town must be more poetical than the country, 
since it is closer to the spirit of man; for 
London, if it be not one of the masterpieces of 
man, is at least one of his sins. A st reet is 
reaj ]y more poetical than a meadow , because 
a street has a secret . A street is going somewhere, an d a. me adow nowhere.  But, in the 
case of the book called "Hymns on the Hill," 
there was another peculiarity, which the King 
pointed out with great acumen in his review. He 
was naturally interested in the matter, for 
he had himself published a volume of lyrics 
about London under his pseudonym of "Daisy 
Daydream." 

This difference, as the King pointed out, consisted in the fact that, while mere artificers like 
"Daisy Daydream" (on whose elaborate style the 

126 



Mental Condition of Adam Wayne 



King, over his signature of "Thunderbolt," 
was perhaps somewhat too severe) thought to 
praise London by comparing it to the country  
using nature, that is, as a background from which 
all poetical images had to be drawn  the more 
robust author of "Hymns on the Hill" praised 
the country, or nature, by comparing it to the 
town, and used the town itself as a background. 
"Take," said the critic, "the typically feminine 
lines, To the Inventor of The Hansom Cab'  

'Poet, whose cunning carved tbis amorous shell, 
Where twain may dwell.' 

"Surely," wrote the King, "no one but a 
woman could have written those lines. A 
woman has always a weakness for nature; with 
her, art is only beautiful as an echo or shadow 
of it. She is praising the hansom cab by 
theme and theory, but her soul is still a child by 
the sea, picking up shells. She can never be 
utterly of the town, as a man can; indeed, do 
we not speak (with sacred propriety) of 'a 
man about town'? Who ever spoke of a 
woman about town? However much, physically, 
'about town' a woman may be, she still 
models herself on nature; she tries to carry 
nature with her; she bids grasses to grow 
on her head, and furry beasts to bite her about 

127 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

the throat. In the heart of a dim city, she 
models her hat on a flaring cottage garden of 
flowers. We, with our nobler civic sentiment, 
model ours on a chimney pot ; the ensign of civilisation. And rather than be without birds, she 
will commit massacre, that she may turn 
her head into a tree, with dead birds to sing 
on it." 

This kind of thing went on for several pages, 
and then the critic remembered his subject, and 
returned to it. 

"Poet, whose cunning carved this amorous shell, 
Where twain may dwell." 

"The peculiarity of these fine though feminine lines," continued "Thunderbolt," "is, as 
we have said, that they praise the hansom cab 
by comparing it to the shell, to a natural thing. 
Now, hear the author of 'Hymns on the Hill,' 
and how he deals with the same subject. In 
his fine nocturne, entitled 'The Last Omnibus he relieves the rich and poignant melancholy 
of the theme by a sudden sense of rushing at the 
end  

'The wind round the old street corner 
Swung sudden and quick as a cab.' 

"Here the distinction is obvious. 'Daisy 

128 



Mental Condition of Adam Wayne 

Daydream' thinks it a great compliment to a 
hansom cab to be compared to one of the spiral 
chambers of the sea. And the author of 
'Hymns on the Hill' thinks it a great compliment to the immortal whirlwind to be compared 
to a hackney coach. He surely is the real 
admirer of London. We have no space to speak 
of all his perfect applications of the idea; of the 
poem in which, for instance, a lady's eyes are 
compared, not to stars, but to two perfect streetlamps guiding the wanderer. We have no 
space to speak of the fine lyric, recalling the 
Elizabethan spirit, in which the poet, instead of 
saying that the rose and the lily contend in her 
complexion, says, with a purer modernism, that 
the red omnibus of Hammersmith and the 
white omnibus of Fulham fight there for the 
mastery. How perfect the image of two contending omnibuses !" 

Here, somewhat abruptly, the review concluded, probably because the King had to send 
off his copy at that moment, as he was in some 
want of money. But the King was a very good 
critic, whatever he may have been as King, and 
he had, to a considerable extent, hit the right 
nail on the head. "Hymns on the Hill" was not 
at all like the poems originally published in 
praise of the poetry of London. And the reason 

129 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

was that it was really written by a man who 
had seen nothing else but London, and who 
regarded it, therefore, as the universe. It was 
written by a raw, red-headed lad of seventeen, named Adam Wayne, who had been 
born in Notting Hill. An accident in his 
seventh year prevented his being taken away to 
the seaside, and thus his whole life had been 
passed in his own Pump Street, and in its neighbourhood. And the consequence was, that he 
saw the street-lamps as things quite as eternal as 
the stars; the two fires were mingled. He saw 
the houses as things enduring, like the mountains, and so he wrote about them as one would 
write about mountains. Nature puts on a disguise when she speaks to every man; to 
this man she put on the disguise of Notting 
Hill. Nature would mean to a poet born 
in the Cumberland hills, a stormy skyline 
and sudden rocks. Nature would mean to a 
poet born in the Essex flats, a waste of 
splendid waters and splendid sunsets. So 
nature meant to this man Wayne a line of 
violet roofs and lemon lamps, the chiaroscuro of 
the town. He did not think it clever or 
funny to praise the shadows and colours of the 
town ; he had seen no other shadows or colours, 
and so he praised them  because they were 

130 



Mental Condition of Adam yne 



shadows and colours. He saw all this ix use 
he was a poet, though in practice a bad poe L 
It is too often forgotten that just as a bad ma.is nevertheless a man, so a bad poet is nevertheless a poet.  

Mr. Wayne's little volume of verse was a complete failure; and he submitted to the decision 
of fate with a quite rational humility, went back 
to his work, which was that of a draper's 
assistant, and wrote no more. He still retained 
his feeling about the town of Notting Hill, 
because he could not possibly have any other 
feeling, because it was the back and base of 
his brain. But he does not seem to have made 
any particular attempt to express it or insist 
upon it. 

He was a genuine natural mystic, one of 
those who live on the border of fairyland. But 
he was perhaps the first to realise how often 
the boundary of fairyland runs through a 
crowded city. Twenty feet from him (for he 
was very short-sighted) the red and white and 
yellow suns of the gas-lights thronged and 
melted into each other like an orchard of 
fiery trees, the beginning of the woods of 
elf-land. 

But, oddly enough, it was because he was a 
small poet that he came to his strange and 

131 



1 



The Napoleon of Rotting Hill 

isolated triumph. It was because he was a 
failure in literature that he became a portent in 
English history. He was one of those to whom 
nature has given the desire without the power 
of artistic expression. He had been a dumb 
poet from his cradle. He might have been so 
to his grave, and carried unuttered into the darkness a treasure of new and sensational song. 
But he was born under the lucky star of a 
single coincidence. He happened to be at the 
head of his dingy municipality at the time of 
the King's jest, at the time when all municipalities were suddenly commanded to break out 
into banners and flowers. Out of the long 
procession of the silent poets who have been 
passing since the beginning of the world, this 
one man found himself in the midst of an 
heraldic vision, in which he could act and speak 
and live lyrically. While the author and the 
victims alike treated the whole matter as a silly 
public charade, this one man, by taking it 
seriously, sprang suddenly into a throne of 
artistic omnipotence. Armour, music, standards, watch-fires, the noise of drums, all 
the theatrical properties were thrown before him. 
This one poor rhymster, having burnt his own 
rhymes, began to live that life of open air and 
acted poetry of which all the poets of the earth 

132 



Mental Condition of Adam Wayne 

have dreamed in vain ; the life for which the Iliad 
is only a cheap substitute. 

Upwards from his abstracted childhood, Adam 
Wayne had grown strongly and silently in a 
certain quality or capacity which is in modern 1 
cities almost entirely artificial, but which can be 
natural, and was primarily almost brutally I 
natural in him, the quality or capacity off 
patriotism. It exists, like other virtues and 
vices, in a certain undiluted reality. It is not 
confused with all kinds of other things. A 
child speaking of his country or his village 
may make every mistake in Mandeville or 
tell every lie in Munchausen, but in his state- 1 
ment there will be no psychological lies any| 
more than there can be in a good song. Adam 
Wayne, as a boy, had for his dull streets in 
Notting Hill the ultimate and ancient sentiment that went out to Athens or Jerusalem. He 
knew the secret of the passion, those secrets 
which make real old national songs sound so 
strange to our civilisation. He knew that real 
patriotism tends to sing about sorrows and J 
forlorn hopes much more than about victory.; 
He knew that in proper names themselves is 
half the poetry of all national poems. Above 
all, he knew the supreme psychological fact 
about patriotism, as certain in connection with 

133 



The Napoleon of Notti?ig Hill 

it as that a fine shame comes to all lovers, the 
fact that the patriot never under any circumstances boasts of the largeness of his country, 
but always, and of necessity, boasts of the 
smallness of it. 

All this he knew, not because he was a 
philosopher or a genius, but because he was a 
child. Any one who cares to walk up a side 
slum like Pump Street, can see a little Adam 
claiming to be king of a paving-stone. And 
he will always be proudest if the stone is 
almost too narrow for him to keep his feet 
inside it. 

It was while he was in such a dream of 
defensive battle, marking out some strip of 
street or fortress of steps as the limit of his 
haughty claim, that the King had met him, and, 
with a few words flung in mockery, ratified 
for ever the strange boundaries of his soul. 
Thenceforward the fanciful idea of the defence 
of Notting Hill in war became to him a thing as 
solid as eating or drinking or lighting a pipe. 
He disposed his meals for it, altered his plans 
for it, lay awake in the night and went over it 
again. Two or three shops were to him an 
arsenal; an area was to him a moat; corners of 
balconies and turns of stone steps were points 
for the location of a culverin or an archer. It is 

134 



Mental Condition of Adam Wayne 

almost impossible to convey to any ordinary 
imagination the degree to which he had transVKajJ M#ed the leaden London landscape to a 
romantic gold. The process began almost in 
babyhood, and became habitual like a literal 
madness. It was felt most keenly at nighty 
when London is really herself, when her lights]! 
shine in the dark like the eyes of innumerably 
cats, and the outline of the dark houses has thf 
bold simplicity of blue hills. But for him the 
night revealed instead of concealing, and he 
read all the blank hours of morning and afternoon, by a contradictory phrase, in the light 1  
x>f that darkness To this man, at any rate, the 
inconceivable had happened. The artificial city 
had become to him nature, and he felt the curbstones and gas-lamps as things as ancient as the 
sky. , J 

One instance may suffice. Walking along 
Pump Street with a friend, he said, as he 
gazed dreamily at the iron fence of a little 
front garden, "How those railings stir one's 
blood." 

His friend, who was also a great intellectual 
admirer, looked at them painfully, but without 
any particular emotion. He was so troubled 
about it that he went back quite a large 
number of times on quiet evenings and stared 

135 



The Napoleon of JSfotting Hill 

at the railings, waiting for something to happen 
to his blood, but without success. At last he 
took refuge in asking Wayne himself. He 
discovered that the ecstacy lay in the one 
point he had never noticed about the railings 
even after his six visits, the fact that they 
were like the great majority of others in 
London, shaped at the top after the manner 
of a spear. As a child, Wayne had half 
unconsciously compared them with the spears in 
pictures of Lancelot and St. George, and 
had grown up under the shadow of the graphic 
association. Now, whenever he looked at 
them, they were simply the serried weapons 
that made a hedge of steel round the sacred 
homes of Notting Hill. He could not have 
cleansed his mind of that meaning even if he 
tried. It was not a fanciful comparison, or 
anything like it. It would not have been true 
to say that the familiar railings reminded him of 
spears; it would have been far truer to say that 
the familiar spears occasionally reminded him of 
railings. 

A couple of days after his interview with the 
King, Adam Wayne was pacing like a caged 
lion in front of live shops that occupied the 
upper end of the disputed street. They were a 
grocer's, a chemist's, a barber's, an old curiosity 

136 



Mental Condition of Adam Wayne 

shop, and a toy-shop that sold also newspapers. 
It was these five shops which his childish 
fastidiousness had first selected as the essentials 
of the Notting Hill campaign, the citadel of the 
city. If Notting Hill was the heart of thej 
universe, and Pump Street was the heart of 
Notting Hill, this was the heart of Pump! 
Street. The fact that they were all small \ 
and side by side realised that feeling for a! 
formidable comfort and compactness which, as 
we have said, was the heart of his patriotism 
and of all patriotism. The grocer (who had a 
wine and spirit license) was included because he 
could provision the garrison; the old curiosity 
shop because it contained enough swords, pistols, partisans, cross-bows, and blunderbusses  
to arm a whole irregular regiment; the toy and 
paper shop because Wayne thought a free press 
an essential centre for the soul of Pump Street; 
the chemist's to cope with outbreaks of disease among the besieged ; and the barber's because 
it was in the middle of all the rest, and the 
barber's son was an intimate friend and spiritual 
affinity. 

It was a cloudless October evening settling 
down through purple into pure silver around the 
roofs and chimneys of the steep little street, 
which looked black and sharp and dramatic. In 

i37 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

the deep shadows the gas-lit shop fronts 
gleamed like five fires in a row, and before 
them, darkly outlined like a ghost against 
some purgatorial furnaces, passed to and fro the 
tall bird-like figure and eagle nose of Adam 
Wayne. 

He swung his stick restlessly, and seemed fitfully talking to himself. 

"There are, after all, enigmas," he said, "even 
to the man who has faith. There are doubts 
that remain even after the true philosophy is 
completed in every rung and rivet. And here 
is one of them. Is the normal human need, 
the normal human condition, higher or lower 
than those special states of the soul which 
call out a doubtful and dangerous glory? 
those special powers of knowledge or sacrifice 
which are made possible only by the existence of 
evil? Which should come first to our affections, the enduring sanities of peace or the 
half-maniacal virtues of battle? Which should 
come first, the man great in the daily round or 
the man great in emergency? Which should 
come first, to return to the enigma before me, 
the grocer or the chemist? Which is more 
certainly the stay of the city, the swift chivalrous chemist or the benignant all-providing 
grocer? In such ultimate spiritual doubts 

138 



Mental Condition of Adam Wayne 

it is only possible to choose a side by the 
higher instincts and to abide the issue. In 
any case, I have made my choice. May I be 
pardoned if I choose wrongly, but I choose the 
grocer." 

"Good morning, sir," said the grocer, who 
was a middle-aged man, partially bald, with harsh 
red whiskers and beard, and forehead lined with 
all the cares of the small tradesman. "What can 
I do for you, sir?" 

Wayne removed his hat on entering the shop, 
with a ceremonious gesture, which, slight as 
it was, made the tradesman eye him with the 
beginnings of wonder. 

"I come, sir," he said soberly, "to appeal to 
your patriotism." 

"Why, sir," said the grocer, "that sounds like 
the times when I was a boy and we used to have 
elections." 

"You will have them again," said Wayne, 
firmly, "and far greater things. Listen, Mr. 
Mead. I know the temptations which a grocer 
has to a too cosmopolitan philosophy. I can 
imagine what it must be to sit all day as you do 
surrounded with wares from all the ends of the 
earth, from strange seas that we have never 
sailed and strange forests that we could not  
even picture. No Eastern king ever had such 

139 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

argosies or such cargoes coming from the sunrise and the sunset, and Solomon in all his 
glory was not enriched like one of you. India 
is at your elbow," he cried, lifting his voice and 
pointing his stick at a drawer of rice, the grocer 
making a movement of some alarm, "China is 
before you, Demerara is behind you, America is 
above your head, and at this very moment, like 
some old Spanish admiral, you hold Tunis in your 
hands." 

Mr. Mead dropped the box of dates which he 
was just lifting, and then picked it up again 
vaguely. 

Wayne went on with a heightened colour, but in 
a lowered voice, 

"I know, I say, the temptations of so international, so universal a vision of wealth. I 
know that it must be your danger not to fall 
like many tradesmen into too dusty and mechanical a narrowness, but rather to be too 
broad, to be too general, too liberal. If a 
narrow nationalism be the danger of the pastrycook, who makes his own wares under his own 
heavens, no less is cosmopolitanism the danger of 
the grocer. But I come to you in the name of 
that patriotism which no wanderings or enlightenments should ever wholly extinguish, 
and I ask you to remember Notting Hill. For, 

140 



Mental Condition of Adam Wayne 

after all, in this cosmopolitan magnificence, she 
has played no small part. Your dates may 
come from the tall palms of Barbary, your 
sugar from the strange islands of the tropics, 
your tea from the secret villages of the Empire 
of the Dragon. That this room might be 
furnished, forests may have been spoiled under 
the Southern Cross, and leviathans speared 
under the Polar Star. But you yourself  
surely no inconsiderable treasure  you yourself, 
the brain that wields these vast interests  you 
yourself, at least, have grown to strength and 
wisdom between these grey houses and under 
this rainy sky. This city which made you, and 
thus made your fortunes, is threatened with war. 
Come forth and tell to the ends of the earth this 
lesson. Oil is from the North and fruits from 
the South; rices are from India and spices from 
Ceylon; sheep are from New Zealand and men 
from Notting Hill" 

The grocer sat for some little while, with dim 
eyes and his mouth open, looking rather like a 
fish. Then he scratched the back of his head, and 
said nothing. Then he said  

"Anything out of the shop, sir ?" 

Wayne looked round in a dazed way. Seeing 
a pile of tins of pine-apple chunks, he waved his 
stick generally towards them. 

141 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

"Yes," he said, 'Til take those." 

"All those, sir?" said the grocer, with greatly 
increased interest. 

"Yes, yes; all those," replied Wayne, still a 
little bewildered, like a man splashed with cold 
water. 

"Very good, sir; thank you, sir," said the 
grocer with animation. "You may count upon 
my patriotism, sir." 

"I count upon it already," said Wayne, and 
passed out into the gathering night. 

The grocer put the box of dates back in its 
place. 

"What a nice fellow he is," he said. "It's odd 
how often they are nice. Much nicer than those 
as are all right." 

Meanwhile Adam Wayne stood outside the 
glowing chemist's shop, unmistakably wavering. 

"What a weakness it is," he muttered. 
"I have never got rid of it from childhood. 
The fear of this magic shop. The grocer is rich, 
he is romantic, he is poetical in the truest sense, 
but he is not  no, he is not supernatural. 
But the chemist! All the other shops stand in 
Notting Hill, but this stands in Elf-land. Look 
at those great burning bowls of colour. It 
must be from them that God paints the sunsets. 

142 



Mental Condition of Adam Wayne 

It is superhuman, and the superhuman is all the 
more uncanny when it is beneficent. That is the 
root of the fear of God. I am afraid. But I must 
be a man and enter." 

He was a man, and entered. A short, dark 
young man was behind the counter with spectacles, and greeted him with a bright but entirely 
business-like smile. 

"A fine evening, sir," he said. 

"Fine, indeed, strange Father," said Adam, 
stretching his hands somewhat forward. "It is 
on such clear and mellow nights that your shop 
is most itself. Then they appear most perfect, 
those moons of green and gold and crimson, 
which from afar, oft guide the pilgrim of pain 
and sickness to this house of merciful witchcraft." 

"Can I get you anything?" asked the 
chemist. 

"Let me see," said Wayne, in a friendly 
but vague manner. "Let me have some Sal 
Volatile." 

"Eightpence, tenpence, or one and sixpence 
a bottle?" said the young man genially. 

"One and six  one and six," replied Wayne, 
with a wild submissiveness. "I come to ask you, 
Mr. Bowles, a terrible question." 

He paused and collected himself. 
143 



The Napoleon of Netting Hill 

"It is necessary," he muttered  "it is necessary to be tactful, and to suit the appeal to each 
profession in turn. 

"I come," he resumed aloud, "to ask you a 
question which goes to the roots of your miraculous toils. Mr. Bowles, shall all this witchery 
cease?" And he waved his stick around the 
shop. 

Meeting with no answer, he continued with 
animation  

"In Notting Hill we have felt to its core the 
elfish mystery of your profession. And now Notting Hill itself is threatened." 

"Anything more, sir?" asked the chemist. 

"Oh," said Wayne, somewhat disturbed  
"oh, what is it chemists sell? Quinine, I 
think. Thank you. Shall it be destroyed? I 
have met these men of Bayswater and North 
Kensington  Mr. Bowles, they are materialists. 
They see no witchery in your work, even 
when it is brought within their own borders. They 
think the chemist is commonplace. They think 
him human." 

The chemist appeared to pause, only a moment, to take in the insult, and immediately 
said  

"And the next article, please?" 

"Alum," said the Provost, wildly. "I 
144 



Mental Condition of Adam Wayne 

resume. It is in this sacred town alone that 
your priesthood is reverenced. Therefore, when 
you fight for us you fight not only for yourself, 
but for everything you typify. You fight not 
only for Notting Hill, but for Fairyland, for as 
surely as Buck and Barker and such men hold 
sway, the sense of Fairyland in some strange manner diminishes.' , 

"Anything more, sir ?" asked Mr. Bowles, with 
unbroken cheerfulness.  v 

"Oh yes, jujubes  Gregory powder  magnesia. The danger is imminent. In all this 
matter I have felt that I fought not merely 
for my own city (though to that I owe all 
my blood), but for all places in which these 
great ideas could prevail. I am fighting not 
merely for Notting Hill, but for Bayswater 
itself; for North Kensington itself. For if 
the gold-hunters prevail, these also will lose 
all their ancient sentiments and all the mystery 
of their national soul. I know I can count upon 
you." 

"Oh, yes, sir," said the chemist, with great 
animation, "we are always glad to oblige a good 
customer." 

Adam Wayne went out of the shop with a deep 
sense of fulfilment of soul. 

"It is so fortunate," he said, "to have 
145 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

tact, to be able to play upon the peculiar 
talents and specialities, the cosmopolitanism of 
the grocer and the world-old necromancy 
of the chemist. Where should I be without 
tact?" 



jfjiet 



146 



Chapter II  The Remarkable Mr. Turnbull 

AFTER two more interviews with shopmen, however, the patriot's confidence in his own psychological 
diplomacy began vaguely to wane. Despite 
the care with which he considered the peculiar 
rationale and the peculiar glory of each separate shop, there seemed to be something unresponsive about the shopmen. Whether it was 
a dark resentment against the uninitiate for 
peeping into their masonic magnificence, he could 
not quite conjecture. 

His conversation with the man who kept 
the shop of curiosities had begun encouragingly. The man who kept the shop of curiosities had indeed enchanted him with a phrase. 
He was standing drearily at the door of his 
shop, a wrinkled man with a grey pointed 
beard, evidently a gentleman who had come down 
in the world. 

"And how does your commerce go, you 
strange guardian of the past?" said Wayne, 
affably. 

"Well, sir, not very well," replied the man, 
with that patient voice of his class which is one 

i47 



The Napoleon of Hotting Hill 

I of the most heart-breaking things in the world. 
"Things are terribly quiet." 

Wayne's eyes shone suddenly. 

"A great saying," he said, "worthy of a man 
whose merchandise is human history. Terribly 
quiet; that is in two words the spirit of this 
age, as I have felt it from my cradle. I sometimes wondered how many other people felt the 
oppression of this union between quietude and 
terror. I see blank well-ordered streets and 
men in black moving about inoffensively, 
sullenly. It goes on day after day, day after 
day, and nothing happens; but to me it is like 
a dream from which I might wake screaming. 
To me the straightness of our life is the 
straightness of a thin cord stretched tight. Its 
stillness is terrible. It might snap with a noise 
like thunder. And you who sit, amid the debris 
of the great wars, you who sit, as it were, 
upon a battlefield, you know that war was less 
terrible than this evil peace; you know that 
the idle lads who carried those swords under 
Francis or Elizabeth, the rude Squire or 
Baron who swung that mace about in Picardy 
or Northumberland battles, may have been 
terribly noisy, but were not like us, terribly 
quiet." 

Whether it was a faint embarrassment of con


The Remarkable Mr. Turnbull 

science as to the original source and date of the 
weapons referred to, or merely an engrained 
depression, the guardian of the past looked, if 
anything, a little more worried. 

"But I do not think," continued Wayne, 
"that this horrible siknce of modernity will y 
last, though I think for the present it will 
increase. What a farce is this modern liberality. | 
Freedom of speech means practically in our 
modern civilisation that we must only talk 
about unimportant things. We must not talk 
about religion, for that is illiberal; we must not 
talk about bread and cheese, for that is talking 
shop; we must not talk about death, for that is 
depressing; we must not talk about birth, for 
that is indelicate. It cannot last. Something 
must break this strange indifference, this 
strange dreamy egoism, this strange loneliness of millions in a crowd. Something 
must break it. Why should it not be you and 
I? Can you do nothing else but guard 
relics ?" 

The shopman wore a gradually clearing expression, which would have led those unsympathetic 
with the cause of the Red Lion to think that the 
last sentence was the only one to which he had 
attached any meaning. 

"I am rather old to go into a new business," 
149 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

he said, "and I don't quite know what to be 
either." 

"Why not," said Wayne, gently having reached 
the crisis of his delicate persuasion  "why not be 
a Colonel ?" 

It was at this point, in all probability, that the 
interview began to yield more disappointing 
results. The man appeared inclined at first to 
regard the suggestion of becoming a Colonel 
as outside the sphere of immediate and relevant 
discussion. A long exposition of the inevitable war of independence, coupled with the 
purchase of a doubtful sixteenth-century sword 
for an exaggerated price, seemed to resettle 
matters. Wayne left the shop, however, somewhat infected with the melancholy of its 
owner. 

That melancholy was completed at the 
barber's. 

"Shaving, sir ?" inquired that artist from inside 
his shop. 

"War!" replied Wayne, standing on the 
threshold. 

"I beg your pardon," said the other, sharply. 

"War!" said Wayne, warmly. "But not for 
anything inconsistent with the beautiful and 
the civilised arts. War for beauty. War for 
society. War for peace. A great chance is 

iSo 



The Remarkable Mr. Turribull 

offered you of repelling that slander which, 
in defiance of the lives of so many artists, 
attributes poltroonery to those who beautify 
and polish the surface of our lives. Why should 
not hairdressers be heroes? Why should 
not " 

"Now, you get out," said the barber, irascibly. 
"We don't want any of your sort here. You get 
out." 

And he came forward with the desperate 
annoyance of a mild person when enraged. 

Adam Wayne laid his hand for a moment on 
the sword, then dropped it. 

"Notting Hill," he said, "will need her 
bolder sons ;" and he turned gloomily to the 
toy-shop. 

It was one of those queer little shops so 
constantly seen in the side streets of London, 
which must be called toy-shops only because toys 
upon the whole predominate; for the remainder of goods seem to consist of almost 
everything else in the world  tobacco, exercisebooks, sweet-stuff, novelettes, halfpenny paper 
clips, halfpenny pencil sharpeners, bootlaces, and 
cheap fireworks. It also sold newspapers, and 
a row of dirty-looking posters hung along the 
front of it. 

"I am afraid," said Wayne, as he entered, 
151 



The 'Napoleon of Rotting Hill 

"that I am not getting on with these tradesmen 
as I should. Is it that I have neglected to rise 
to the full meaning of their work ? Is there some 
secret buried in each of these shops which no mere 
poet can discover ?" 

He stepped to the counter with a depression 
which he rapidly conquered as he addressed the 
man on the other side of it,  a man of short 
stature, and hair prematurely white, and the look 
of a large baby. 

"Sir," said Wayne, "I am going from house 
to house in this street of ours, seeking to stir 
up some sense of the danger which now threatens 
our city. Nowhere have I felt my duty so difficult as here. For the toy-shop keeper has 
to do with all that remains to us of Eden before 
the first wars began. You sit here meditating 
continually upon the wants of that wonderful 
time when every staircase leads to the stars, and 
every garden-path to the other end of nowhere. 
Is it thoughtlessly, do you think, that I strike 
the dark old drum of periU in the paradise of 
children? But consider a moment; do not 
condemn me hastily. Even that paradise itself 
contains the rumour or beginning of that danger, 
just as the Eden that was made for perfection 
contained the terrible tree. For judge childhood, 
even by your own arsenal of its pleasures. You 

152 



The Remarkable Mr, Turnbull 

keep bricks; you make yourself thus, doubtless, the witness of the constructive instinct 
older than the destructive. You keep dolls; 
you make yourself the priest of that divine 
id oja trv. You keep Noah's Arks; you perpetuate the memory of the salvation of all life as 
a precious, an irreplaceable thing. But do you 
keep only, sir, the symbols of this prehistoric 
sanity, this childish rationality of the earth ? Do 
you not keep more terrible things? What are 
those boxes, seemingly of lead soldiers, that 
I see in that glass case? Are they not witnesses to that terror .and beauty, that 
desire for a lovely death, which could not 
be excluded-, even from the immortality of 
Eden? Do not despise the lead soldiers, Mr. 
Turnbull." 

"I don't," said Mr. Turnbull, of the toy-shop, 
shortly, but with great emphasis. 

"I am glad to hear it," replied Wayne. "I 
confess that I feared for my military schemes 
the awful innocence of your profession. How 
I thought to myself, will this man, used only to 
the wooden swords that give pleasure, think 
of the steel swords that give pain? But I am 
at least partly reassured. Your tone suggests 
to me that I have at least the entry of a gate of 
your fairyland  the gate through which the 

i53 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

soldiers enter, for it cannot be denied  I ought, 
sir, no longer to deny, that it is of soldiers that 
I come to speak. Let your gentle employment 
make you merciful towards the troubles of the 
world. Let your own silvery experience tone 
down our sanguine sorrows. For there is war in 
Notting HM." 

The little toy-shop keeper sprang up suddenly, 
slapping his fat hands like two fans on the 
counter. 

"War?" he cried. "Not really, sir? Is 
it true? Oh, what a joke! Oh, what a sight for 
sore eyes !" , 

Wayne was almost taken aback by this outburst. 

"I am delighted," he stammered. "I had no 
notion  " 

He sprang out of the way just in time to avoid 
Mr. Turnbull, who took a flying leap over 
the counter and dashed to the front of the 
shop. 

"You look here, sir," he said; "you just look 
here. ,, 

He came back with two of the torn posters 
in his hand which were flapping outside his 
shop. 

"Look at those, sir," he said, and flung them 
down on the counter. 

154 



The Remarkable Mr. Turribull 



Wayne bent over them, and read on one 



REDUCTION OF THE CENTRAL DERVISH CITY. 
REMARKABLE, ETC." 



On the other he read  



NICARAGUAN CAPITAL SURRENDERS AFTER A 



Wayne bent over them again, evidently 
puzzled; then he looked at the dates. They 
were both dated in August fifteen years before. 

"Why do you keep these old things?" he said, 
startled entirely out of his absurd tact of mysticism. "Why do you hang them outside your 
shop?" 

"Because," said the other, simply, "they are 
the records of the last war. You mentioned war just now. It happens to be my 
hobby." 

Wayne lifted his large blue eyes with an infantile wonder. 

"Come with me," said Turnbull, shortly, 
and led him into a parlour at the back of the 
shop. 

iS5 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

In the centre of the parlour stood a large 
deal table. On it were set rows and rows of 
the tin and lead soldiers which were part of the 
shopkeeper's stock. The visitor would have 
thought nothing of it if it had not been for 
a certain odd grouping of them, which did not 
seem either entirely commercial or entirely 
haphazard. 

"You are acquainted, no doubt," said Turnbull, turning his big eyes upon Wayne  "you 
are acquainted, no doubt, with the arrangement 
 of the American and Nicaraguan troops in the 
last battle." And he waved his hand towards 
the table. 

"I am afraid not," said Wayne. "I" 

"Ah, you were at that time occupied too much, 
perhaps, with the Dervish affair. You will 
find it in this corner." And he pointed to 
a part of the floor where there was another 
arrangement of children's soldiers grouped here 
and there. 

"You seem," said Wayne, "to be interested in 
military matters." 

"I am interested in nothing else," answered the 
toy-shop keeper, simply. 

Wayne appeared convulsed with a singular, 
suppressed excitement. 

"In that case," he said, "I may approach you 
156 



The Remarkable Mr. Turribull 

with an unusual degree of confidence. Touching the matter of the defence of Notting Hill, 
I " 

"Defence of Notting Hill? Yes, sir. This 
way, sir' said Turnbull, with great perturbation. "Just step into this side room;" and he 
led Wayne into another apartment, in which the 
table was entirely covered with an arrangement of children's bricks. A second glance at 
it told Wayne that the bricks were arranged in 
the form of a precise and perfect plan of Notting 
Hill. "Sir," said Turnbull, impressively, "you 
have, by a kind of accident, hit upon the whole 
secret of my life. As a boy, I grew up among 
the last wars of the world, when Nicaragua was 
taken and the dervishes wiped out. And I 
adopted it as a hobby, sir, as you might adopt 
astronomy or bird-stuffing. I had no ill-will 
to any one, but I was interested in war as a 
science, as a game. And suddenly I was bowled 
out. The big Powers of the world, having 
swallowed up all the small ones, came to that 
confounded agreement, and there was no more 
war. There was nothing more for me to do but 
to do what I do now  to read the old campaigns in dirty old newspapers, and to work them 
out with tin soldiers. One other thing had 
occurred to me. I thought it an amusing fancy 

i57 



The Napoleon of Hotting Hill 

to make a plan of how this district of ours ought 
to be defended if it were ever attacked. It seems 
to interest you too." 

"If it were ever attacked," repeated Wayne, 
awed into an almost mechanical enunciation. 
"Mr. Turnbull, it is attacked. Thank Heaven, 
I am bringing to at least one human being the 
news that is at bottom the only good news to 
any son of Adam. Your life has not been 
useless. Your work has not been play. Now, 
when the hair is already grey on your head, 
Turnbull, you shall have your youth. God 
has not destroyed it, He has only deferred it. 
Let us sit down here, and you shall explain to me 
this military map of Notting Hill. For you and 
I have to defend Notting Hill together." 

Mr. Turnbull looked at the other for a moment, then hesitated, and then sat down 
beside the bricks and the stranger. He did 
not rise again for seven hours, when the dawn 
broke. 

      

The headquarters of Provost Adam Wayne 
and his Commander-in-Chief consisted of a small 
and somewhat unsuccessful milk-shop at the 
corner of Pump Street. The blank white 
morning had only just begun to break over the 
blank London buildings when Wayne and 

158 



The Remarkable Mr. Tumbull 

Turnbull were to be found seated in the cheerless and unswept shop. Wayne had something > 
feminine in his character; he belonged to that j 
class of persons who forget their meals when A 
anything interesting is in hand. He had had 
nothing for sixteen hours but hurried glasses of 
milk, and, with a glass standing empty beside 
him, he was writing and sketching and dotting 
and crossing out with inconceivable rapidity 
with a pencil and a piece of paper. Turnbull 
was of that more masculine type in which a 
sense of responsibility increases the appetite, 
and with his sketch-map beside him he was 
dealing strenuously with a pile of sandwiches in 
a paper packet, and a tankard of ale from th 
tavern opposite, whose shutters had just been 
taken down. Neither of them spoke, and there 
was no sound in the living stillness except 
the scratching of Wayne's pencil and the squealing of an aimless-looking cat. At length Wayne 
broke the silence by saying  

"Seventeen pounds, eight shillings and ninepence." 

Turnbull nodded and put his head in the tankard. 

"That," said Wayne, "is not counting the five 
pounds you took yesterday. What did you do 
with it?" 

159 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

"Ah, that is rather interesting !" replied Turnbull, with his mouth full. "I used that five pounds 
in a kindly and philanthropic act." 

Wayne was gazing with mystification in his 
queer and innocent eyes. 

"I used that five pounds," continued the other, 
"in giving no less than forty little London boys 
rides in hansom cabs." 

"Are you insane ?" asked the Provost. 

"It is only my light touch," returned Turnbull. "These hansom-cab rides will raise the 
tone  raise the tone, my dear fellow  of our 
London youths, widen their horizon, brace 
their nervous system, make them acquainted 
with the various public monuments of our great 
city. Education, Wayne, education. How many 
excellent thinkers have pointed out that political 
reform is useless until we produce a cultured populace. So that twenty years hence, when these 
boys are grown up  " 

"Mad!" said Wayne, laying down his pencil; 
"and five pounds gone!" 

f "You are in error," explained Turnbull. "You 

grave creatures can never be brought to under
 stand how much quicker work really goes 

with the assistance of nonsense and good meals. 

Stripped of its decorative beauties, my statement 

I was strictly .accurate. Last night I 'gave forty 

1 ' %  160 



The Remarkable Mr. Turribull 

half-crowns to forty little boys, and sent them 
all over London to take hansom cabs. I told 
them in every case to tell the cabman to 
bring them to this spot. In half an hour from 
now the declaration of war will be posted up. At 
the same time the cabs will have begun to 
come in, you will have ordered out the guard, 
the little boys will drive up in state, we shall 
commandeer the horses for cavalry, use the 
cabs for barricade, and give the men the choice 
between serving in our ranks and detention in 
our basements and cellars. The little boys we 
can use as scouts. The main thing is that we 
start the war with an advantage unknown in all 
the other armies  horses. And now," he said, 
finishing his beer, "I will go and drill the 
troops." 

And he walked out of the milk-shop, leaving 
the Provost staring. 

A minute or two afterwards, the Provost 
laughed. He only laughed once or twice in 
his life, and then he did it in a queer way as if 
it were an art he had not mastered. Even he 
saw something funny in the preposterous coup of 
the half-crowns and the little boys. He did not 
see the monstrous absurdity of the whole 
policy and the whole war. He enjoyed it 
seriously as a crusade, that is, he enjoyed it 

161 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

far more than any joke can be enjoyed. Turnbull enjoyed it partly as a joke, even more 
perhaps as a reversion from the things he hated 
 modernity and monotony and civilisation. To 
break up the vast machinery of modern life and 
use the fragments as engines of war, to make the 
barricade of omnibuses and points of vantage of 
chimney-pots, was to him a game worth infinite 
risk and trouble. He had that rational and deliberate preference which will always to the end 
trouble the peace of the world, the rational and 
deliberate preference for a short life and a merry 
one. 






M 






162 



Chapter III  The Experiment of Mr. 
Buck 

AN earnest and eloquent petition was 
sent up to the King signed with 
the names of Wilson, Barker, Buck, 
Swindon and others. It urged that at the 
forthcoming conference to be held in his 
Majesty's presence touching the final disposition of the property in Pump Street, it 
might be held not inconsistent with political 
decorum and with the unutterable respect they 
entertained for his Majesty if they appeared in 
ordinary morning dress, without the costume 
decreed for them as Provosts. So it happened 
that the company appeared at that council in 
frock coats and that the King himself limited his 
love of ceremony to appearing (after his not 
unusual manner), in evening dress with one 
order  in this case not the Garter, but the button 
of the Club of Old Clipper's Best Pals, a 
decoration obtained (with difficulty) from a 
half-penny boy's paper. Thus also it happened 
that the only spot of colour in the room 
was Adam Wayne, who entered in great 
dignity with the great red robes and the great 
sword. 

163 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

"We have met," said Auberon, "to decide the 
most arduous of modern problems. May we be 
successful." And he sat down gravely. 

Buck turned his chair a little and flung one 
leg over the other. 

"Your Majesty," he said, quite good-humouredly, "there is only one thing I can't 
understand, and that is why this affair is not 
settled in five minutes. Here's a small property which is worth a thousand to us and is not 
worth a hundred to any one else. We offer 
the thousand. It's not business-like, I know, 
for we ought to get it for less, and it's not reasonable and it's not fair on us, but I'm damned if I 
can see why it's difficult." 

"The difficulty may be very simply stated," 
said Wayne. "You may offer a million and it 
will be very difficult for you to get Pump 
Street." 

"But, look here, Mr. Wayne," cried Barker, 
striking in with a kind of cold excitement. 
"Just look here. You've no right to take up a 
position like that. You've a right to stand 
out for a bigger price, but you aren't doing 
that. You're refusing what you and every sane 
man knows to be a splendid offer simply from 
malice or spite  it must be malice or spite. 
And that kind of thing is really criminal; it's 

164 



The Experiment of Mr. Buck 

against the public good. The King's Government 
would be justified in forcing you." 

With his lean fingers spread on the table he 
stared anxiously at Wayne's face, which did not 
move. 

"In forcing you ... it would," he repeated. 

"It shall," said Buck, shortly, turning to the 
table with a jerk. "We have done our best to 
be decent." 

Wayne lifted his large eyes slowly. 

"Was it my Lord Buck," he enquired, "who 
said that the King of England 'shall' do something?" 

Buck flushed and said testily  

"I mean it must  it ought to, as I say we've 
done our best to be generous. I defy any one 
to deny it. As it is Mr. Wayne, I don't want 
to say a word that's uncivil. I hope it's not 
uncivil to say that you can be, and ought to be, 
in gaol. It is criminal to stop public works for 
a whim. A man might as well burn ten 
thousand onions in his front garden or bring 
up his children to run naked in the street, 
as do what you say you have a right to do. 
People have been compelled to sell before 
now. The King could compel you, and I hope 
he will." 

"Until he does," said Wayne, calmly, "the 
165 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

power and government of this great nation is 
on my side and not yours, and I defy you to 
defy it." 

"In what sense," cried Barker, with his 
feverish eyes and hands, "is the Government on 
your side?" 

With one ringing movement Wayne unrolled a 
great parchment on the table. It was decorated 
down the sides with wild water-colour sketches of 
vestrymen in crowns and wreaths. 

"The Charter of the Cities," he began. 

Buck exploded in a brutal oath and laughed. 

"That tomfool's joke. Haven't we had 
enough  " 

"And there you sit," cried Wayne, springing 
erect and with a voice like a trumpet, "with no 
argument but to insult the King before his 
face." 

Buck rose also with blazing eyes. 

"I am hard to bully," he began  and the slow 
tones of the King struck in with incomparable 
gravity  

"My Lord Buck, I must ask you to remember that your King is present. It is not often 
that he needs to protect himself among his subjects." 

Barker turned to him with frantic gestures. 

"For God's sake don't back up the madman 
166 



The Experiment of Mr. Buck 

now," he implored. "Have your joke another 
time. Oh, for Heaven's sake  " 

"My Lord Provost of South Kensington," said 
King Auberon, steadily. "I do not follow your 
remarks which are uttered with a rapidity 
unusual at Court. Nor do your well-meant 
efforts to convey the rest with your fingers 
materially assist me. I say that my Lord 
Provost of North Kensington, to whom I spoke, 
ought not in the presence of his Sovereign to 
speak disrespectfully of his Sovereign's ordinances. Do you disagree?" 

Barker turned restlessly in his chair, and Buck 
cursed without speaking. The King went on in 
a comfortable voice  

"My Lord Provost of Notting Hill, proceed." 

Wayne turned his blue eyes on the King, and 
to every one's surprise there was a look in them 
not of triumph, but of a certain childish distress. 

"I am sorry, your Majesty," he said; "I fear 
I was more than equally to blame with the 
Lord Provost of North Kensington. We were 
debating somewhat eagerly, and we both rose 
to our feet. I did so first, I am ashamed to say. 
The Provost of North Kensington is, therefore, comparatively innocent. I beseech your 
Majesty to address your rebuke chiefly, at 
least, to me. Mr. Buck is not innocent, for 

167 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

he did no doubt, in the heat of the moment, 
speak disrespectfully. But the rest of the discussion he seems to me to have conducted with 
great good temper." 

Buck looked genuinely pleased, for business 
men are all simple-minded, and have therefore 
that degree of communion with fanatics. The 
King, for some reason, looked, for the first time 
in his life, ashamed. 

"This very kind speech of the Provost of Notting Hill," began Buck, pleasantly, "seems to 
me to show that we have at last got on to a 
friendly footing. Now come, Mr. Wayne. 
Five hundred pounds have been offered to you 
for a property you admit not to be worth a 
hundred. Well, I am a rich man and I won't 
be outdone in generosity. Let us say fifteen 
hundred pounds, and have done with it. And 
let us shake hands." And he rose, glowing and 
laughing. 

"Fifteen hundred pounds," whispered Mr. 
Wilson of Bayswater ; "can we do fifteen hundred 
pounds?" 

"I'll stand the racket," said Buck heartily. 
"Mr. Wayne is a gentleman and has spoken up 
for me. So I suppose the negotiations are at an 
end." 

Wayne bowed. 

168 



The Experiment of Mr. Buck 

"They are indeed at an end. I am sorry I cannot sell you the property." 

"What?" cried Mr. Barker, starting to his 
feet. 

"Mr. Buck has spoken correctly," said the 
King. 

"I have, I have," cried Buck, springing up also; 
"I said" 

"Mr. Buck has spoken correctly," said the 
King; "the negotiations are at an end." 

All the men at the table rose to their feet; 
Wayne alone rose without excitement. 

"Have I, then," he said, "your Majesty's permission to depart? I have given my last 
answer." 

"You have it," said Auberon, smiling, but not 
lifting his eyes from the table. And amid a dead 
silence the Provost of Notting Hill passed out of 
the room. 

"Well ?" said Wilson, turning round to Barker, 
"Well?" 

Barker shook his head desperately. 

"The man ought to be in an asylum," he 
said. "But one thing is clear, we need not 
bother further about him. The man can be 
treated as mad." 

"Of course," said Buck, turning to him with 
sombre decisiveness. "You're perfectly right, 

169 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

Barker. He is a good enough fellow, but he 
can be treated as mad. Let's put it in simple 
form. Go and tell any twelve men in any 
town, go and tell any doctor in any town, 
that there is a man offered fifteen hundred 
pounds for a thing he could sell commonly 
for four hundred, and that when asked for a 
reason for not accepting it he pleads the inviolate 
sanctity of Notting Hill and calls it the Holy 
Mountain. What would they say? What more 
can we have on our side than the commonsense of everybody? On what else do all laws 
rest? I'll tell you, Barker, what's better than 
any further discussion. Let's send in workmen 
on the spot to pull down Pump Street. And if 
old Wayne says a word, arrest him as a lunatic. 
That's all." 

Barker's eyes kindled. 

"I always regarded you, Buck, if you don't 
mind my saying so, as a very strong man. I'll 
follow you." 

"So, of course, will I," said Wilson. 

Buck rose again impulsively. 

"Your Majesty," he said, glowing with popularity, "I beseech your Majesty to consider 
favourably the proposal to which we have committed ourselves. Your Majesty's leniency, 
our own offers, have fallen in vain on that 

170 



The Experiment of Mr. Buck 

extraordinary man. He may be right. He 
may be God. He may be the devil. But we 
think it, for practical purposes, more probable that he is off his head. Unless that 
assumption were acted on, all human affairs 
would go to pieces. We act on it, and we 
propose to start operations in Notting Hill at 
once." 

The King leaned back in his chair. 

"The Charter of the Cities ..." he said with 
a rich intonation. 

But Buck, being finally serious, was also 
cautious, and did not again make the mistake of 
disrespect. 

"Your Majesty," he said, bowing, "I am 
not here to say a word against anything your 
Majesty has said or done. You are a far better 
educated man than I, and no doubt there were 
reasons, upon intellectual grounds, for those 
proceedings. But may I ask you and appeal to 
your common good-nature for a sincere answer? 
When you drew up the Charter of the Cities 
did you contemplate the rise of a man like 
Adam Wayne? Did you expect that the 
Charter  whether it was an experiment, or a 
scheme of decoration, or a joke  could ever 
really come to this  to stopping a vast scheme 
of ordinary business, to shutting up a road, to 

171 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

spoiling the chances of cabs, omnibuses, railway 
stations, to disorganising half a city, to risking a 
kind of civil war? Whatever were your objects, 
were they that ?" 

Barker and Wilson looked at him admiringly; 
the King more admiringly still. 

"Provost Buck," said Auberon, "you speak in 
public uncommonly well. I give you your point 
with the magnanimity of an artist. My scheme 
did not include the appearance of Mr. Wayne. 
Alas ! would that my poetic power had been great 
enough." 

"I thank your Majesty," said Buck, courteously but quickly. "Your Majesty's statements 
are always clear and studied: therefore I may 
draw a deduction. As the scheme, whatever it 
was, on which you set your heart did not 
include the appearance of Mr. Wayne, it will 
survive his removal. Why not let us clear 
away this particular Pump Street, which does 
interfere with our plans, and which does not, by 
your Majesty's own statement, interfere with 
yours." 

"Caught out!" said the King, enthusiastically 
and quite impersonally, as if he were watching a 
cricket match. 

"This man Wayne," continued Buck, "would 
be shut up by any doctors in England. But we 

172 



The Experiment of Mr. Buck 

only ask to have it put before them. Meanwhile no one's interests, not even in all probability his own, can be really damaged by going 
on with the improvements in Notting Hill. Not 
our interests, of course, for it has been the 
hard and quiet work of ten years. Not the 
interests of Notting Hill, for nearly all its 
educated inhabitants desire the change. Not 
the interests of your Majesty, for you say, with 
characteristic sense, that you never contemplated 
the rise of the lunatic at all. Not, as I say, his 
own interests, for the man has a kind heart and 
many talents, and a couple of good doctors would 
probably put him righter than all the free cities 
and sacred mountains in creation. I therefore 
assume, if I may use so bold a word, that your 
Majesty will not offer any obstacle to our proceeding with the improvements." 

And Mr. Buck sat down amid subdued but 
excited applause among the allien 

"Mr. Buck," said the King, "I beg your pardon, 
for a number of beautiful and sacred thoughts, 
in which you were generally classified as 2 
fool. But there is another thing to be considered. Suppose you send in your workmen, 
and Mr. Wayne does a thing regrettable indeed, 
but of which I am sorry to say, I think him quite 
capable  knocks their teeth out." 

m 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

"I have thought of that, your Majesty," said 
Mr. Buck, easily, "and I think it can simply 
be guarded against. Let us send in a strong 
guard of say a hundred men  a hundred of 
the North Kensington Halberdiers" (he smiled 
grimly), "of whom your Majesty is so fond. 
Or say  a hundred and fifty. The whole 
population of Pump Street, I fancy, is only about 
a hundred." 

"Still they might stand together and lick you," 
said the King, dubiously. 

"Then say two hundred," said Buck, gaily. 

"It might happen," said the King, restlessly, 
"that one Notting Hiller fought better than two 
North Kensingtons." 

"It might," said Buck, coolly; "then say two 
hundred and fifty." 

The King bit his lip. 

"And if they are beaten, too," he said 
viciously. 

"Your Majesty," said Buck, and leaned back 
easily in his chair. "Suppose they are. If anything be clear, it is clear that all fighting 
matters are mere matters of arithmetic. Here 
we have a hundred and fifty say of Notting Hill 
soldiers. Or say two hundred. If one of 
them can fight two of us  we can send in, not 
four hundred, but six hundred, and smash 

m 



The Experiment of Mr. Buck 

him. That is all. It is out of all immediate 
probability that one of them could fight four of 
us. So what I say is this. Run no risks. 
Finish it at once. Send in eight hundred men i 
and smash him  smash him almost without y 
seeing him. And go on with the improve-\ 
ments." \ 

And Mr. Buck pulled out a bandanna and blew 
his nose. 

"Do you know, Mr. Buck," said the King, 
staring gloomily at the table, "the admirable 
clearness of your reason produces in my mind 
a sentiment which I trust I shall not offend 
you by describing as an aspiration to punch 
your head. You irritate me sublimely. What 
can it be in me? Is it the relic of a moral 
sense ?" 

"But your Majesty," said Barker, eagerly and 
suavely, "does not refuse our proposals ?" 

"My dear Barker, your proposals are as damnable as your manners. I want to have nothing 
to do with them. Suppose I stopped them 
altogether. What would happen ?" 

Barker answered in a very low voice  

"Revolution." 

The King glanced quickly at the men around 
the table. They were all looking down silently: 
their brows were red. 

i7S 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

He rose with a startling suddenness, and an 
unusual pallor. 

"Gentlemen," he said, "you have overruled me. 
Therefore I can speak plainly. I think Adam 
Wayne, who is as mad as a hatter, worth 
more than a million of you. But you have the 
force, and, I admit, the common sense, and he is 
lost. Take your eight hundred halberdiers and 
smash him. It would be more sportsmanlike to 
take two hundred." 

"More sportsmanlike," said Buck, grimly, "but 
a great deal less humane. We are not artists, and 
streets purple with gore do not catch our eye in 
the right way." 

"It is pitiful," said Auberon. "With five or 
six times their number there will be no fight at 
all." 

"I hope not," said Buck, rising and adjusting 
his gloves. "We desire no fight, your Majesty. 
We are peaceable business men." 

"Well," said the King, wearily, "the conference 
is at an end at last." 

And he went out of the room before any one 
else could stir. 

      

Forty workmen, a hundred Bayswater Halberdiers, two hundred from South, and three from 
North Kensington, assembled at the foot of Hol
176 



The Experiment of Mr. Buck 

land Walk and marched up it, under the general 
direction of Barker, who looked flushed and 
happy in full dress. At the end of the procession 
a small and sulky figure lingered like an urchin. 
It was the King. 

"Barker," he said at length, appealingly, "you 
are an old friend of mine  you understand 
my hobbies as I understand yours. Why can't 
you let it alone? I hoped that such fun 
might come out of this Wayne business. Why 
can't you let it alone? It doesn't really so much 
matter to you  what's a road or so? For me 
it's the one joke that may save me from 
pessimism. Take fewer men and give me an 
hour's fun. Really and truly, James, if you 
collected coins or humming-birds, and I could 
buy one with the price of your road, I would 
buy it. I collect incidents  those rare, those 
precious things. Let me have one. Pay a few 
pounds for it. Give these Notting Hillers a 
chance. Let them alone." 

"Auberon," said Barker, kindly, forgetting all 
royal titles in a rare moment of sincerity, 
"I do feel what you mean. I have had moments when these hobbies have hit me. I have 
had moments when I have sympathised with 
your humours. I have had moments, though 
you may not easily believe it, when I have 

177 



( 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

sympathised with the madness of Adam Wayne. 
But the world, Auberon, the real world, is 
not run on these hobbies. It goes on great 
brutal wheels of facts  wheels on which you 
are the butterfly. And Wayne is the fly on 
the wheel." 

Auberon's eyes looked frankly at the other's. 

"Thank you, James; what you say is true. 
It is only a parenthetical consolation to me to 
compare the intelligence of flies somewhat favourably with the intelligence of wheels. But it is the 
nature of flies to die soon, and the nature of 
wheels to go on for ever. Go on with the wheel. 
Good-bye, old man." 

And James Barker went on, laughing, with a 
high colour, slapping his bamboo on his leg. 

The King watched the tail of the retreating 
regiment with a look of genuine depression, which 
made him seem more like a baby than ever. 
Then he swung round and struck his hands 
together. 

"In a world without humour," he said, 
"the only thing to do is to eat. And how 
perfect an exception! How can these people 
strike dignified attitudes, and pretend that 
things matter, when the total ludicrousness of 
life is proved by the very method by which it 
is supported? A man strikes the lyre, and 

178 



The Experiment of Mr. Buck 

says, 'Life is real, life is earnest and then 
goes into a room and stuffs alien substances into 
a hole in his head. I think Nature was indeed\ 
a little broad in her humour in these matters.  
But we all fall back on the pantomime, as 
I have in this municipal affair. Nature has 
her farces, like the act of eating or the shape 
of the kangaroo, for the more brutal appetite. She keeps her stars and mountains for 
those who can appreciate something more 
subtly ridiculous." He turned to his equerry. 
"But, as I said 'eating let us have a picnic like 
two nice little children. Just run and bring 
me a table and a dozen courses or so, and 
plenty of champagne, and under these swinging 
boughs, Bowler, we will return to Nature." 

It took about an hour to erect in Holland Lane 
the monarch's simple repast, during which 
time he walked up and down and whistled, but 
still with an unaffected air of gloom. He had 
really been done out of a pleasure he had 
promised himself, and had that empty and 
sickened feeling which a child has when disappointed of a pantomime. When he and the 
equerry had sat down, however, and consumed a 
fair amount of dry champagne, his spirits began 
mildly to revive. 

"Things take too long in this world," he said. 
179 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

"I detest all this Barker ian business about 
evolution and the gradual modification of things. 
I wish the world had been made in six days, 
and knocked to pieces again in six more. 
And I wish I had done it. The joke's good 
enough in a broad way, sun and moon and the 
image of God, and all that, but they keep it up 
so damnably long. Did you ever long for a 
miracle, Bowler ?" 

"No, sir," said Bowler, who was an evolutionist, and had been carefully brought up. 

"Then I have," answered the King. "I have 
walked along a street with the best cigar in the 
cosmos in my mouth, and more Burgundy 
inside me than you ever saw in your life, 
and longed that the lamp-post would turn into 
an elephant to save me from the hell of blank 
existence. Take my word for it, my evolutionary Bowler, don't you believe people when 
they tell you that people sought for a sign, and 
V \ believed in miracles because they were ignorant. 
They did it because they were wise, filthily, vilely 
\ wise  too wise to eat or sleep or put on their 
 boots with patience. This seems delightfully like 
a new theory of the origin of Christianity, which 
would itself be a thing of no mean absurdity. Take 
some more wine." 

The wind blew round them as they sat at their 
180 



The Experiment of Mr. Buck 

little table, with its white cloth and bright 
wine-cups, and flung the tree-tops of Holland 
Park against each other, but the sun was in that 
strong temper which turns green into gold. The 
King pushed away his plate, lit a cigar slowly, 
and went on  

"Yesterday I thought that something next 
door to a really entertaining miracle might 
happen to me before I went to amuse the 
worms. To see that red-haired maniac waving 
a great sword, and making speeches to his 
incomparable followers, would have been a 
glimpse of that Land of Youth from which 
the Fates shut us out. I had planned some 
quite delightful things. A Congress of Knightsbridge with a treaty, and myself in the chair, 
and perhaps a Roman triumph, with jolly old 
Barker led in chains. And now these wretched 
prigs have gone and stamped out the exquisite 
Mr. Wayne altogether, and I suppose they will 
put him in a private asylum somewhere in their 
damned humane way. Think of the treasures 
daily poured out to his unappreciative keeper! 
I wonder whether they would let me be his 
keeper. But life is a vale. Never forget at 
any moment of your existence to regard it in the 
light of a vale. This graceful habit, if not 
acquired in youth  " 

181 



The Napoleon of Nolting Hill 

The King stopped, with his cigar lifted, for 
there had slid into his eyes the startled look of 
a man listening. He did not move for a few 
moments; then he turned his head sharply 
towards the high, thin, and lath-like paling which 
fenced certain long gardens and similar spaces 
from the lane. From behind it there was 
coming a curious scrambling and scraping 
noise, as of a desperate thing imprisoned in this 
box of thin wood. The King threw away his 
cigar, and jumped on to the table. From this 
position he saw a pair of hands hanging with a 
hungry clutch on the top of the fence. Then 
the hands quivered with a convulsive effort, and 
a head shot up between them  the head of one 
of the Bayswater Town Council, his eyes and 
whiskers wild with fear. He swung himself 
over, and fell on the other side on his face, and 
groaned openly and without ceasing. The next 
moment the thin, taut wood of the fence was 
struck as by a bullet, so that it reverberated 
like a drum, and over it came tearing and 
cursing, with torn clothes and broken nails and 
bleeding faces, twenty men at one rush. The 
King sprang five feet clear off the table on to 
the ground. The moment after the table was 
flung over, sending bottles and glasses flying, 
and the debris was literally swept along the 

182 



The Experiment of Mr. Buck 

ground by that stream of men pouring past, and 
Bowler was borne along with them, as the 
King said in his famous newspaper article, 
"like a captured bride." The great fence 
swung and split under the load of climbers that 
still scaled and cleared it. Tremendous gaps 
were torn in it by this living artillery; and 
through them the King could see more and 
more frantic faces, as in a dream, and more and 
more men running. They were as miscellaneous as if some one had taken the lid off 
a human dustbin. Some were untouched, some 
were slashed and battered and bloody, some 
were splendidly dressed, some tattered and 
half-naked, some were in the fantastic garb of 
the burlesque cities, some in the dullest modern dress. The King stared at all of them, but 
none of them looked at the King. Suddenly he 
stepped forward. 

"Barker," he said, "what is all this?" 
"Beaten," said the politician  "beaten all to 
hell!" And he plunged past with nostrils 
shaking like a horse's, and more and more men 
plunged after him. 

Almost as he spoke, the last standing strip of 
fence bowed and snapped, flinging, as from 
a catapult, a new figure upon the road. He wore 
the flaming red of the halberdiers of Notting 

183 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

Hill, and on his weapon there was blood, 
and in his face victory. In another moment 
masses of red glowed through the gaps of 
the fence, and the pursuers, with their halberds, 
came pouring down the lane. Pursued and pursuers alike swept by the little figure with the 
owlish eyes, who had not taken his hands out of 
his pockets. 

The King had still little beyond the confused 
sense of a man caught in a torrent  the feeling 
of men eddying by. Then something happened 
which he was never able afterwards to describe, 
and which we cannot describe for him. Suddenly 
in the dark entrance, between the broken gates 
of a garden, there appeared framed a flaming 
figure. 

Adam Wayne, the conqueror, with his face 
flung back, and his mane like a lion's, stood 
with his great sword point upwards, the red 
raiment of his office flapping round him like 
the red wings of an archangel. And the King 
saw, he knew not how, something new and overwhelming. The great green trees and the 
great red robes swung together in the wind. 
The sword seemed made for the sunlight. The 
preposterous masquerade, born of his own 
mockery, towered over him and embraced the 

world. This was the normal, this was sanity, 

184 



The Experiment of Mr. Buck 

this was nature; and he himself, with his 
rationality and his detachment and his black frock 
coat, he was the exception and the accident  
a blot of black upon a world of crimson and 
gold. 




AiJ>w 



185 



BOOK IV 



Chapter I  The Battle of the Lamps ~ 

MR. BUCK, who, though retired, frequently went down to his big 
drapery stores in Kensington High 
Street, was locking up those premises, being 
the last to leave. It was a wonderful evening 
of green and gold, but that did not trouble 
him very much. If you had pointed it out, 
he would have agreed seriously, for the rich 
always desire to be artistic. 

He stepped out into the cool air, buttoning up 
his light coat, and blowing great clouds from 
his cigar, when a figure dashed up to him in another yellow overcoat, but unbuttoned and flying 
behind him. 

"Hullo, Barker!" said the draper. "Any of 
our summer articles? You're too late. Factory Acts, Barker. Humanity and progress, 
my boy." 

"Oh, don't chatter," cried Barker, stamping. 
"We've been beaten." 

"Beaten  by what?" asked Buck, mystified. 

"By Wayne." 

Buck looked at Barker's fierce white face for 
the first time, as it gleamed in the lamplight. 

"Come and have a drink," he said.  
189 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

They adjourned to a cushioned and glaring 
buffet, and Buck established himself slowly and 
lazily in a seat, and pulled out his cigar-case. 

"Have a smoke," he said. 

Barker was still standing, and on the fret, but 
after a moment's hesitation, he sat down, as if he 
might spring up again the next minute. They 
ordered drinks in silence. 

"How did it happen ?" asked Buck, turning his 
big bold eyes on him. 

"How the devil do I know?" cried Barker. 
"It happened like  like a dream. How can 
two hundred men beat six hundred? How can 
they?" 

"Well," said Buck, coolly. "How did they? 
You ought to know." 

"I don't know. I can't describe," said the 
other, drumming on the table. "It seemed 
like this. We were six hundred and marched 
with those damned poleaxes of Auberon's  
the only weapons we've got. We marched two 
abreast. We went up to Holland Walk, between 
the high palings which seemed to me to go 
straight as an arrow for Pump Street. I was 
near the tail of the line and it was a long one. 
When the end of it was still between the high 
palings, the head of the line was already crossing 
Holland Park Avenue. Then the head plunged 

190 



KL'i'i'i'i'm.i'i'rriTl'riTl 



n< 




The Battle of the Lamps 



into the network of narrow streets on the 
other side, and the tail and myself came out on 
the great crossing. When we also had reached 
the northern side and turned up a small street 
that points, crookedly as it were, towards 
Pump Street, the whole thing felt different. The 
streets dodged and bent so much that the head 
of our line seemed lost altogether: it might as 
well have been in North America. And all this 
time we hadn't seen a soul." 

Buck, who was idly dabbing the ash of his 
cigar on the ash-tray, began to move it deliberately over the table, making feathery grey lines, 
a kind of map. 

"But though the little streets were all deserted (which got a trifle on my nerves), as 
we got deeper and deeper into them, a thing 
began to happen that I couldn't understand. 
Sometimes a long way ahead  three turns or 
corners ahead, as it were  there broke suddenly 
a sort of noise, clattering, and confused cries, 
and then stopped. Then, when it happened, 
something, I can't describe it  a kind of shake 
or stagger went down the line, as if the line 
were a live thing, whose head had been struck, 
or had been an electric cord. None of us knew 
why we were moving, but we moved and 
jostled. Then we recovered, and went on 

191 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

through the little dirty streets, round corners, 

and up twisted ways. The little crooked streets 

began to give me a feeling I can't explain  as if 

it were a dream. I felt as if things had lost their 

reason, and we should never get out of the 

maze. Odd to hear me talk like that, isn't it ? The 

streets were quite well-known streets, all down 

on the map. But the fact remains. I wasn't afraid 

- >f something happening. I was afraid of nothing 

 v ver na PP en i n g  nothing ever happening for all 

 God's eternity. ,, 

He drained his glass and called for more 
whisky. He drank it and went on. 

"And then something did happen. Buck, it's 
the solemn truth, that nothing has ever happened 
to you in your life. Nothing had ever happened 
to me in my life." 

"Nothing ever happened!" said Buck, staring. 
"What do you mean?" 

"Nothing has ever happened," repeated Barker, 
with a morbid obstinacy. "You don't know 
what a thing happening means? You sit in 
your office expecting customers, and customers 
come; you walk in the street expecting friends, 
and friends meet you; you want a drink and 
get it; you feel inclined for a bet and make 
it. You expect either to win or lose, and 
you do either one or the other. But 

192 



The Battle of the Lamps 



things happening !" and he shuddered ungovernably. 

"Go on," said Buck, shortly. "Get on." 

"As we walked wearily round the corners, 
something happened. When something happens, it happens first, and you see it afterwards. 
It happens of itself, and you have nothing to do 
with it. It proves a dreadful thing  that there 
are other things besides one's self. I can only 
put it in this way. We went round one turning, two turnings, three turnings, four turnings, 
five. Then I lifted myself slowly up from the 
gutter where I had been shot half senseless, 
and was beaten down again by living men 
crashing on top of me, and the world was full 
of roaring, and big men rolling about like ninepins." 

Buck looked at his map with knitted brows. 

"Was that Portobello Road ?" he asked. 

"Yes," said Barker. "Yes; Portobello Road 
I saw it afterwards; but, my God  what a 
place it was! Buck, have you ever stood and 
let a six foot of a man lash and lash at 
your head with six feet of pole with six 
pounds of steel at the end? Because, when 
you have had that experience, as Walt 
Whitman says, 'you re-examine philosophies an 
religions.' " 

193 



 



The Napoleon of Hotting Hill 




"I have no doubt," said Buck. "If that 
was Portobello Road, don't you see what 
happened ?" 

"I know what happened exceedingly well. I 
was knocked down four times; an experience 
which, as I say, has an effect on the mental 
attitude. And another thing happened, too. I 
knocked down two men. After the fourth 
fall (there was not much bloodshed  more 
brutal rushing and throwing  for nobody could 
use their weapons), after the fourth fall, I say, 
I got up like a devil, and I tore a poleaxe out 
of a man's hand and struck where I saw the 
scarlet of Wayne's fellows, struck again and 
again. Two of them went over, bleeding on 
the stones, thank God  and I laughed and 
found myself sprawling in the gutter again, and 
got up again, and struck again, and broke my 
halberd to pieces. I hurt a man's head, 
though." 

Buck set down his glass with a bang, and spat 
out curses through his thick moustache. 

"What is the matter ?" asked Barker, stopping, 
for the man had been calm up to now, and 
now his agitation was far more violent than 
his own. 

"The matter?" said Buck, bitterly; "don't you 
see how these maniacs have got us? Why 

194 



The Battle of the Lamps 



should two idiots, one a clown and the other a 
screaming lunatic, make sane men so different 
from themselves? Look here, Barker; I will give 
you a picture. A very well-bred young man 
of this century is dancing about in a frock-coat. 
He has in his hands a nonsensical seventeenth 
century halberd, with which he is trying to 
kill men in a street in Notting Hill. Damn 
it ! don't you see how they've got us ? Never 
mind how you felt  that is how you looked. 
The King would put his cursed head on one 
side and call it exquisite. The Provost of 
Notting Hill would put his cursed nose in 
the air and call it heroic. But in Heaven's 
name what would you have called it  two days 
before?" 

Barker bit his lip. 

"You haven't been through it, Buck," he 
said. "You don't understand fighting 'the 
atmosphere." 

"I don't deny the atmosphere," said Buck, 
striking the table. "I only say it's their atmosphere. It's Adam Wayne's atmosphere. It's the 
atmosphere which you and I thought had vanished 
from an educated world for ever." 

"Well, it hasn't," said Barker; "and if you have 
any lingering doubts, lend me a poleaxe and I'll 
show you." 

195 



\ 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

There was a long silence, and then Buck 
turned to his neighbour and spoke in that goodtempered tone that comes of a power of looking 
facts in the face; the tone in which he concluded 
great bargains. 

"Barker," he said, "you are right. This 
old thing  this fighting, has come back. It has 
come back suddenly and taken us by surprise. 
So it is first blood to Adam Wayne. But, 
unless reason and arithmetic and everything 
else have gone crazy, it must be next and 
last blood to us. But when an issue has really 
arisen, there is only one thing to do  to 
study that issue as such and win in it. Barker, 
since it is fighting, we must understand fighting. I must understand fighting as coolly and 
completely as I understand drapery; you must 
understand fighting as coolly and completely 
as you understand politics. Now, look at 
the facts. I stick without hesitation to my 
original formula. Fighting, when we have the 
stronger force, is only a matter of arithmetic. 
It must be. You asked me just now how two 
hundred men could defeat six hundred. I can 
tell you. Two hundred men can defeat six 
hundred when the six hundred behave like 
fools. When they forget the very conditions 
they are fighting in; when they fight in a 

196 



The Battle of the Lamps 



swamp as if it were a mountain; when they 
fight in a forest as if it were a plain; when they 
fight in streets without remembering the object of 
streets." 

"What is the object of streets?" asked 
Barker. 

"What is the object of supper?" cried 
Buck, furiously. "Isn't it obvious? This 
military science is mere common sense. The 
object of a street is to lead from one place 
to another; therefore all streets join; therefore 
street fighting is quite a peculiar thing. You 
advanced into that hive of streets as if you were 
advancing into an open plain where you could 
see everything. Instead of that you were 
advancing into the bowels of a fortress, with 
streets pointing at you, streets turning on you, 
streets jumping out at you, and all in the 
hands of the enemy. Do you know what 
Portobello Road is? It is the only point on 
your journey where two side streets run up 
opposite each other. Wayne massed his men on 
the two sides, and when he had let enough 
of your line go past, cut it in two like a 
worm. Don't you see what would have saved 



you ?' 



Barker shook his head. 

"Can't your 'atmosphere' help you?" asked 
197 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

Buck, bitterly. "Must I attempt explanations 
in the romantic manner? Suppose that, as you 
were fighting blindly with the red Notting 
Hi Hers who imprisoned you on both sides, 
you had heard a shout from behind them. 
Suppose, oh, romantic Barker! that behind 
the red tunics you had seen the blue and gold 
of South Kensington taking them in the rear, 
surrounding them in their turn and hurling them 
on to your halberds." 

"If the thing had been possible,'' began Barker, 
cursing. 

"The thing would have been as possible," said 
Buck, simply; "as simple as arithmetic. There 
are a certain number of street entries that lead 
to Pump Street. There are not nine hundred; 
there are not nine million. They do not grow 
in the night. They do not increase like mushrooms. It must be possible with such an overwhelming force as we have to advance by all of 
them at once. In every one of the arteries, or 
approaches, we can put almost as many men as 
Wayne can put into the field altogether. Once do 
that and we have him to demonstration. It is 
like a proposition in Euclid." 

"You think that is certain," said Barker, 
anxious but dominated delightfully. 

"Fll tell you what I think," said Buck, getting 
198 



The Battle of the Lamps 



up jovially. "I think Adam Wayne made an 
uncommonly spirited little fight. And I think I 
am confoundedly sorry for him." 

"Buck, you are a great man," cried Barker,  
rising also. "You've knocked me sensible 
again. I am ashamed to say it, but I was 
getting romantic. Of course, what you say 
is adamantine sense. Fighting, being physical,  
must be mathematical. We were beaten because 
we were neither mathematical nor physical nor> 
anything else  because we deserved to be beaten. 
Hold all the approaches, and with our force we 
must have him. When shall we open the next 
campaign ?" 

"Now," said Buck, and walked out of the 
bar. 

"Now!" cried Barker, following him eagerly. 
"Do you mean now ? It is so late." 

Buck turned on him, stamping. 

"Do you think fighting is under the Factory 
Acts?" he said. And he called a cab. "Notting 
Hill Gate Station," he said, and the two drove 
off. 

A genuine reputation can sometimes be made 
in an hour. Buck, in the next sixty or eighty 
minutes showed himself a really great man of 
action. His cab carried him like a thunder
199 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

bolt from the King to Wilson, from Wilson 
to Swindon, from Swindon to Barker again; 
if his course was jagged, it had the jaggedness of the lightning. Only two things he 
carried with him, his inevitable cigar and the 
map of North Kensington and Notting Hill. 
There were, as he again and again pointed out, 
with every variety of persuasion and violence, 
only nine possible ways of approaching Pump 
Street within a quarter of a mile around it; 
three out of W T estbourne Grove, two out of 
Ladbroke Grove, and four out of Notting Hill 
High Street. And he had detachments of 
two hundred each, stationed at every one of the 
entrances before the last green of that strange 
sunset had sunk out of the black sky. 

The sky was particularly black, and on this 
alone was one false protest raised against the 
triumphant optimism of the Provost of North 
Kensington. He overruled it with his infectious 
common sense. 

"There is no such thing," he said, "as night 
in London. You have only to follow the line of 
street lamps. Look, here is the map. Two 
hundred purple North Kensington soldiers 
under myself march up Ossington Street, 
two hundred more under Captain Bruce, 
of the North Kensington Guard, up Clanricarde 

200 



The Battle of the Lamps 



Gardens. Two hundred yellow West Kensingtons under Provost Swindon attack from Pernbridge Road. Two hundred more of my men from 
the eastern streets, leading away from Queen's 
Road. Two detachments of yellows enter 
by two roads from Westbourne Grove. 
Lastly, two hundred green Bayswaters come 
down from the North through Chepstow Place, 
and two hundred more under Provost Wilson 
himself, through the upper part of Pembridge 
Road. Gentlemen, it is mate in two moves. The 
enemy must either mass in Pump Street and 
be cut to pieces  or they must retreat past 
the Gaslight & Coke Co.  and rush on my four 
hundred  or they must retreat past St. Luke's 
Church and rush on the six hundred from 
the West. Unless we are all mad, it's 
plain. Come on. To your quarters and await 
Captain Bruce's signal to advance. Then you 
have only to walk up a line of gas-lamps and 
smash this nonsense by pure mathematics. Tomorrow we shall be all civilians again." 

His optimism glowed like a great fire in the 
night, and ran round the terrible ring in which 
Wayne was now held helpless. The fight was 



 Clanricarde Gardens at this time was no longer a cul-desac, but was connected by Pump Street to Pembridge Square. 
See map. 

201 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

already over. One man's energy for one hour had 
saved the city from war. 

For the next ten minutes Buck walked up and 
down silently beside the motionless clump of 
his two hundred. He had not changed his 
appearance in any way, except to sling across 
his yellow overcoat a case with a revolver in it. 
So that his light-clad modern figure showed up 
oddly beside the pompous purple uniforms of his 
halberdiers, which darkly but richly coloured the 
black night. 

At length a shrill trumpet rang from some way 
up the street; it was the signal of advance. 
Buck briefly gave the word, and the whole 
purple line, with its dimly shining steel, moved 
up the side alley. Before it was a slope of 
street, long, straight, and shining in the dark. 
It was a sword pointed at Pump Street, the heart 
at which nine other swords were pointed that 
night. 

A quarter of an hour's silent marching 

brought them almost within earshot of any 

' tumult in the doomed citadel. But still there 

was no sound and no sign of the enemy. This 

time, at any rate, they knew that they were closing 

in on it mechanically, and they marched on 

under the lamplight and the dark without any 

of that eerie sense of ignorance which Barker 

202 



The Battle of the Lamps 



had felt when entering the hostile country by one 
avenue alone. 

"Halt  point arms!" cried Buck, suddenly, 
and as he spoke there came a clatter of feet 
tumbling along the stones. But the halberds 
were levelled in vain. The figure that rushed 
up was a messenger from the contingent of the 
North. 

"Victory, Mr. Buck !" he cried, panting, "they 
are ousted. Provost Wilson of Bayswater has 
taken Pump Street." 

Buck ran forward in his excitement. 

"Then, which way are they retreating? It 
must be either by St. Luke's to meet Swindon, or 
by the Gas Company to meet us. Run like mad 
to Swindon and see that the yellows are holding the St. Luke's Road. We will hold 
this, never fear. We have them in an iron trap. 
Run!" 

As the messenger dashed away into the darkness, the great guard of North Kensington 
swung on with the certainty of a machine. 
Yet scarcely a hundred yards further their 
halberd points again fell in line gleaming in the 
gas-light. For again a clatter of feet was heard 
on the stones, and again it proved to be only the 
messenger. 

"Mr. Provost," he said, "the yellow West Ken203 



 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

singtons have been holding the road by St. 
Luke's for twenty minutes since the capture of 
Pump Street. Pump Street is not two hundred 
yards away, they cannot be retreating down that 
road." 

"Then they are retreating down this!" said 
Provost Buck, with a final cheerfulness, "and by 
good fortune down a well-lighted road, though it 
twists about. Forward!" 

As they moved along the last three hundred 
yards of their journey, Buck fell, for the first time 
in his life, perhaps, into a kind of philosophical reverie, for men of his type are always 
made kindly, and as it were melancholy, by success. 

"I am sorry for poor old Wayne, I really am," 
he thought. "He spoke up splendidly for me 
at that Council. And he blacked old Barker's 
eye with considerable spirit. But I don't 
see what a man can expect when he fights 
against arithmetic, to say nothing of civilisation. 
And what a wonderful hoax all this military 
genius is. I suspect I've just discovered what 
Cromwell discovered, that a sensible tradesman 
is the best general, and that a man who can 
buy men and sell men can lead and kill them. 
The thing's simply like adding up a column in a 
ledger. If Wayne has two hundred men, he 

204 



The Battle of the Lamps 



can't put two hundred men in nine places at once. 
If they're ousted from Pump Street they're 
flying somewhere. If they're not flying past 
the church they're flying past the Works. And 
so we have them. We business men should 
have no chance at all except that cleverer people than we get bees in their bonnets that 
prevent them from reasoning properly  so we 
reason alone. And so I, who am comparatively 
stupid, see things as God sees them, as a vast 
machine. My God, what's this?" And he 
clapped his hands to his eyes and staggered 
back. 

Then through the darkness he cried in a dreadful voice  

"Did I blaspheme God ?  I am struck blind." 

"What ?" wailed another voice behind him, the 
voice of a certain Wilfred Jarvis of North Kensington. 

"Blind!" cried Buck; "blind!" 

"I'm blind, too !" cried Jarvis, in an agony. 

"Fools, all of you," said a gross voice behind 
them; "we're all blind. The lamps have gone 
out." 

"The lamps  but why? where?" cried Buck, 
turning furiously in the darkness. "How are we 
to get on? How are we to chase the enemy? 
Where have they gone ?" 

205, 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

"The enemy went  " said the rough voice 
behind, and then stopped, doubtfully. 

"Where?" shouted Buck, stamping like a madman. 

"They went," said the gruff voice, "past the 
Gas Works, and they've used their chance." 

"Great God !" thundered Buck, and snatched at 
his revolver; "do you mean they've turned 
out--" 

But almost before he had spoken the words, he 
was hurled like a stone from a catapult into the 
midst of his own men. 

"Notting Hill! Notting Hill!" cried frightful 
voices out of the darkness, and they seemed 
to come from all sides, for the men of North 
Kensington, unacquainted with the road, had 
lost all their bearings in the black world of blindness. 

"Notting Hill ! Notting Hill !" cried the invisible people, and the invaders were hewn down 
horribly with black steel, with steel that gave no 
glint against any light. 

  

Buck, though badly maimed with the blow of 
a halberd, kept an angry but splendid sanity. He 
groped madly for the wall and found it. Struggling with crawling fingers along it, he found 
a side opening and retreated into it with the 

206 



The Battle of the Lamps 



remnants of his men. Their adventures during that prodigious night are not to be described. They did not know whether they were 
going towards or away from the enemy. Not 
knowing where they themselves were, or where 
their opponents were, it was mere irony to ask 
where was the rest of their army. For a thing 
had descended upon them which London does not 
know  darkness, which was before the stars were 
made, and they were as much lost in it as if they 
had been made before the stars. Every now and 
then, as those frightful hours wore on, they buffetted in the darkness against living men, who 
struck at them and at whom they struck, with 
an idiot fury. When at last the grey dawn came, 
they found they had wandered back to the edge 
of the Uxbridge Road. They found that in those 
horrible eyeless encounters, the North Kensingtons and the Bayswaters and the West Kensingtons had again and again met and butchered each 
other, and they heard that Adam Wayne was barricaded in Pump Street. X %h 



Jr 



fJr 



t< 



207 



Chapter II  The Correspondent of the 
Court Journal 

tXOURNALISM had become like most other 
| such things in England, under the cautious 
 government and philosophy represented 
by James Barker, somewhat sleepy and much 
diminished in importance. This was partly due 
to the disappearance of party government and 
public speaking, partly to the compromise or 
dead-lock which had made foreign wars impossible, but mostly, of course, to the temper 
of the whole nation, which was that of a 
people in a kind of back-water. Perhaps 
the most well-known of the remaining newspapers was the Court Journal, which was published in a dusty but genteel-looking office just 
out of Kensington High Street. For when 
all the papers of a people have been for years 
growing more and more dim and decorous 
and optimistic, the dimmest and most decorous and most optimistic is very likely 
to win. In the journalistic competition which 
was still going on at the beginning of the 
twentieth century, the final victor was the 
Court Journal. 

For some mysterious reason the King had 

2Q 



The Correspondent of the Court Journal 

a great affection for hanging about in the Court 
Journal office, smoking a morning cigarette and 
looking over files. Like all ingrainedly idle men, 
he was very fond of lounging and chatting ia% 
places where other people were doing work. But 
one would have thought that, even in the prosaic 
England of his day, he might have found a more 
bustling centre. 

On this particular morning, however, he came 
out of Kensington Palace with a more alert step 
and a busier air than usual. He wore an extravagantly long frock-coat, a pale-green waistcoat, 
a very full and degage black tie, and curious 
yellow gloves. This was his uniform as Colonel of a regiment of his own creation, the ist 
Decadents Green. It was a beautiful sight to 
see him drilling them. He walked quickly 
across the Park and the High Street, lighting his 
cigarette as he went, and flung open the door of 
the Court Journal office. 

"You've heard the news, Pally  youVe heard 
the news ?" he said. 

The Editor's name was Hoskins, but the King 
called him Pally, which was an abbreviation of 
Paladium of our Liberties. 

"Well, your Majesty," said Hoskins, slowly 
(he was a worried, gentlemanly looking person, 
with a wandering brown beard)  "well, your 

209 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

Majesty,. I have heard rather curious things, 
but I" 

"You'll hear more of them," said the King, dancing a few steps of a kind of negro shuffle. "You'll 
hear more of them, my blood-and-thunder tribune. 
Do you know what I am going to do for 
you?" 

"No, your Majesty," replied the Paladium, 
vaguely. 

"I'm going to put your paper on strong, 
dashing, enterprising lines," said the King. 
"Now, where are your posters of last night's 
defeat?" 

"I did not propose, your Majesty," said the 
Editor, "to have any posters exactly  " 

"Paper, paper!" cried the King, wildly; 
"bring me paper as big as a house. I'll do you 
posters. Stop, I must take my coat off." He 
began removing that garment with an air of 
set intensity, flung it playfully at Mr. Hoskins' 
head, entirely enveloping him, and looked at 
himself in the glass. "The coat off," he 
said, "and hat on. That looks like a subeditor. It is indeed the very essence of 
sub-editing. Well," he continued, turning 
round abruptly, "come along with that 
paper." 

The Paladium had only just extricated himself 

210 



The Correspondent of the Court Journal 

reverently from the folds of the King's frockcoat, and said bewildered  

"I am afraid, your Majesty  " 

"Oh, you've got no enterprise," said Auberon. 
"What's that roll in the corner? Wall-paper? 
Decorations for your private residence? Art in 
the home, Pally? Fling it over here, and I'll 
paint such posters on the back of it that when 
you put it up in your drawing-room you'll paste 
the original pattern against the wall." And 
the King unrolled the wall-paper, spreading 
it over the whole floor. "Now give me the scissors," he cried, and took them himself before the 
other could stir. 

He slit the paper into about five pieces, each 
nearly as big as a door. Then he took a big blue 
pencil and went down on his knees on the dusty 
oil-cloth, and began to write on them, in huge 
letters  

"from the front. 

general buck defeated. 

darkness, danger, and death. 

wayne said to be in pump street. 



He contemplated it for some time, with his head 
on one side, and got up, with a sigh. 

211 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

"Not quite intense enough," he said  "not 
alarming. I want the Court Journal to be feared 
as well as loved. Let's try something more hardhitting." And he went down on his knees again. 
After sucking the blue pencil for some time, he 
began writing again busily. "How will this do?" 
he said  

"wayne's wonderful victory' 

"I suppose," he said, looking up appealingly, 
and sucking the pencil  "I suppose we couldn't 
say Victory  'Wayne's wonderful wictory'? 
No, no. Refinement, Pally, refinement. I 
have it." 

"WAYNE WINS. 

ASTOUNDING FIGHT IN THE DARK. 

The gas-lamps in their courses, fought against 
Buck." 

"(Nothing like our fine old English translation. ) What else can we say ? Well, anything to 
annoy old Buck ;" and he added, thoughtfully, in 
smaller letters  

"Rumoured Court-martial on General Buck." 

"Those will do for the present," he said, and 
turned them both face downwards. "Paste, 
please." 

212 



The Correspondent of the Court Journal 

The Paladium, with an air of great terror, 
brought the paste out of an inner room. 

The King slabbed it on with the enjoyment of 
a child messing with treacle. Then taking one 
of his huge compositions fluttering in each 
hand, he ran outside, and began pasting them 
up in prominent positions over the front of the 
office. 

"And now," said Auberon, entering again 
with undiminished vivacity  "now for the leading 
article." 

He picked up another of the large strips of 
wall-paper, and, laying it across a desk, pulled 
out a fountain-pen and began writing with 
feverish intensity, reading clauses and fragments 
aloud to himself, and rolling them on his tongue 
like wine, to see if they had the pure journalistic 
flavour. 

"The news of the disaster to our forces in 
Notting Hill, awful as it is, awful as it is  (no, 
distressing as it is), may do some good if it draws 
attention to the what's-his-name inefficiency 
(scandalous inefficiency, of course) of the Government's preparations. In our present state 
of information, it would be premature (what 
a jolly word!)  it would be premature to cast 
any reflections upon the conduct of General 
Buck, whose services upon so many stricken 

213 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

fields (ha, ha!), and whose honourable scars 
and laurels, give him a right to have judgment 
upon him at least suspended. But there is one 
matter on which we must speak plainly. We 
have been silent on it too long, from feelings, 
perhaps of mistaken caution, perhaps of mistaken loyalty. This situation would never have 
arisen but for what we can only call the indefensible conduct of the King. It pains us to say 
such things, but, speaking as we do in the 
public interests (I plagiarise from Barker's 
famous epigram), we shall not shrink because of 
the distress we may cause to any individual, 
even the most exalted. At this crucial moment 
of our country, the voice of the People demands 
with a single tongue, 'Where is the King?' 
What is he doing while his subjects tear each 
other in pieces in the streets of a great city? 
Are his amusements and his dissipations (of 
which we cannot pretend to be ignorant) so 
engrossing that he can spare no thought for a 
perishing nation ? It is with a deep sense of our 
responsibility that we warn that exalted person 
that neither his great position nor his incomparable talents will save him in the hour of 
delirium from the fate of all those who, in the 
madness of luxury or tyranny, have met the 
English people in the rare day of its wrath." 

214 



The Correspondent of the Court Journal 

"I am now," said the King, "going to write 
an account of the battle by an eye-witness." 
And he picked up a fourth sheet of wall-paper. 
Almost at the same moment Buck strode 
quickly into the office. He had a bandage round 
his head. 

"I was told," he said with his usual gruff civility, "that your Majesty was here." 

"And of all things on earth," cried the King, 
with delight, "here is an eye-witness! An eyewitness who, I regret to observe, has at present 
only one eye to witness with. Can you write 
us the special article, Buck? Have you a rich 
style?" 

Buck, with a self-restraint which almost 
approached politeness, took no notice whatever of 
the King's maddening geniality. 

"I took the liberty, your Majesty," he said 
shortly, "of asking Mr. Barker to come here 
also." 

As he spoke, indeed, Barker came swinging 
into the office, with his usual air of hurry. 

"What is happening now?" asked Buck, turning to him with a kind of relief. 

"Fighting still going on," said Barker. 
"The four hundred from West Kensington 
were hardly touched last night. They hardly 
got near the place. Poor Wilson's Bayswater 

215 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

men got cut about, though. They fought confoundedly well. They took Pump Street 
once. What mad things do happen in the 
world. To think that of all of us it should be 
little Wilson with the red whiskers who came out 
best" 

The King made a note on his paper  

"Romantic Conduct of Mr. Wilson." 

"Yes," said Buck, "it makes one a bit less proud 
y of one's 'hV " 

The King suddenly folded or crumpled up the 
paper, and put it in his pocket. 

"I have an idea," he said. "I will be an eyewitness. I will write you such letters from 
the Front as will be more gorgeous than the 
real thing. Give me my coat, Paladium. I 
entered this room a mere King of England. I 
leave it, Special War Correspondent of the Court 
Journal. It is useless to stop me, Pally ; it is vain 
to cling to my knees, Buck ; it is hopeless, Barker, 
to weep upon my neck. 'When duty calls'  the 
remainder of the sentiment escapes me. You will 
receive my first article this evening by the eight 
o'clock post." 

And, running out of the office, he jumped 
upon a blue Bayswater omnibus that went 
swinging by. 

216 



The Correspondent of the Court Journal 

"Well," said Barker, gloomily, "well." 

"Barker," said Buck, "business may be lower 
than politics, but war is, as I discovered last 
night, a long sight more like business. You 
politicians are such ingrained demagogues that 
even when you have a despotism you think of 
nothing but public opinion. So you learn to tack 
and run, and are afraid of the first breeze. Now 
we stick to a thing and get it. And our mistakes 
help us. Look here ! at this moment we've beaten 
Wayne." 

"Beaten Wayne," repeated Barker. 

"Why the dickens not?" cried the other, 
flinging out his hands. "Look here. I said last 
night that we had them by holding the 
nine entrances. Well, I was wrong. We 
should have had them but for a singular event 
 the lamps went out. But for that it was 
certain. Has it occurred to you, my brilliant Barker, that another singular event has happened since that singular event of the lamps going 
out?" 

"What event?" asked Barker. 

"By an astounding coincidence, the sun has 

risen," cried out Buck, with a savage air of 

patience. "Why the hell aren't we holding all 

those approaches now, and passing in on them 

again? It should have been done at sunrise. 

217 



The Napoleon of dotting Mill 

The confounded doctor wouldn't let me go out. 
You were in command." 

Barker smiled grimly. 

"It is a gratification to me, my dear Buck, 
to be able to say that we anticipated your 
suggestions precisely. We went as early as 
possible to reconnoitre the nine entrances. 
Unfortunately, while we were fighting each 
other in the dark, like a lot of drunken 
navvies, Mr. Wayne's friends were working 
very hard indeed. Three hundred yards from 
Pump Street, at every one of those entrances, 
there is a barricade nearly as high as the houses. 
They were finishing the last, in Pembridge 
Road, when we arrived. Our mistakes," he cried 
bitterly, and flung his cigarette on the ground. 
"It is not we who learn from them." 

There was a silence for a few moments, and 
Barker lay back wearily in a chair. The office 
clock ticked exactly in the stillness. 

At length Barker said suddenly  

"Buck, does it ever cross your mind what this 
is all about? The Hammersmith to Maida 
Vale thoroughfare was an uncommonly good 
speculation. You and I hoped a great deal 
from it. But is it worth it? It will cost us 
thousands to crush this ridiculous riot. Suppose 
we let it alone?" 

218 



The Correspondent of the Court Journal 

"And be thrashed in public by a red-haired 
madman whom any two doctors would lock up?" 
cried out Buck, starting to his feet. "What do 
you propose to do, Mr. Barker? To apologise 
to the admirable Mr. Wayne? To kneel to the 
Charter of the Cities? To clasp to your 
bosom the flag of the Red Lion? To kiss in 
succession every sacred lamp-post that saved 
Notting Hill? No, by God! My men fought 
jolly well  they were beaten by a trick. And 
they'll fight again." 

"Buck," said Barker, "I always admired you. 
And you were quite right in what you said the 
other day." 

"In what?" 

"In saying," said Barker, rising quietly, 
"that we had all got into Adam Wayne's 
atmosphere and out of our own. My friend, 
the whole territorial kingdom of Adam Wayne 
extends to about nine streets, with barricades at 
the end of them. But the spiritual kingdom of 
Adam Wayne extends, God knows where  
it extends to this office at any rate. The redhaired madman whom any two doctors would 
lock up is filling this room with his roaring, unreasonable soul. And it was the redhaired madman who said the last word you 
spoke." 

219 



The Napoleon of Hotting Hill 

Buck walked to the window without replying. 
"You understand, of course," he said at last, 
"I do not dream of giving in." 

The King, meanwhile, was rattling along on 
the top of his blue omnibus. The traffic of 
London as a whole had not, of course, been 
greatly disturbed by these events, for the affair 
was treated as a Notting Hill riot, and that 
area was marked off as if it had been in the 
hands of a gang of recognised rioters. The 
blue omnibuses simply went round as they 
would have done if a road were being 
mended, and the omnibus on which the correspondent of the Court Journal was sitting 
swept round the corner of Queen's Road, 
Bayswater. 

The King was alone on the top of the vehicle, 
and was enjoying the speed at which it was 
going. 

"Forward, my beauty, my Arab," he said, 
patting the omnibus encouragingly, "fleetest of 
all thy bounding tribe. Are thy relations with 
thy driver, I wonder, those of the Bedouin and 
his steed? Does he sleep side by side with 
thee" 

His meditations were broken by a sudden 
and jarring stoppage. Looking over the edge, 

220 




KING AUBERON DESCENDED FROM THE OMNIBUS WITH DIGNITY 



The Correspondent of the Court Journal 

he saw that the heads of the horses were being 
held by men in the uniform of Wayne's army, 
and heard the voice of an officer calling out 
orders. 

King Auberon descended from the omnibus 
with dignity. The guard or picket of red halberdiers who had stopped the vehicle did not 
number more than twenty, and they were under 
the command of a short, dark, clever-looking 
young man, conspicuous among the rest as 
being clad in an ordinary frock-coat, but girt 
round the waist with a red sash and a long 
seventeenth-century sword. A shiny silk hat 
and spectacles completed the outfit in a pleasing 
manner. 

"To whom have I the honour of speaking?'' 
said the King, endeavouring to look like 
Charles L, in spite of personal difficulties. 

The dark man in spectacles lifted his hat with 
equal gravity. 

"My name is Bowles," he said. "I am a 
chemist. I am also a captain of O company of 
the army of Notting Hill. I am distressed at 
having to incommode you by stopping the 
omnibus, but this area is covered by our proclamation, and we intercept all traffic. May I 
ask to whom I have the honour  Why, good 
gracious, I beg your Majesty's pardon. I am 

221 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

quite overwhelmed at finding myself concerned 
with the King." 

Auberon put up his hands with indescribable 
grandeur. 

"Not with the King," he said ; "with the special 
war correspondent of the Court Journal." 

"I beg your Majesty's pardon," began Mr. 
Bowles, doubtfully. 

"Do you call me Majesty? I repeat," said 
Auberon firmly, "I am a representative of 
the press. I have chosen, with a deep sense 
of responsibility, the name of Pinker. I 
should desire a veil to be drawn over the 
past." 

"Very well, sir," said Mr. Bowles, with an 
air of submission, "in our eyes the sanctity of 
the press is at least as great as that of the 
throne. We desire nothing better than that 
our wrongs and our glories should be widely 
known. May I ask, Mr. Pinker, if you have any 
objection to being presented to the Provost and 
to General Turnbull?" 

"The Provost I have had the honour of 
meeting," said Auberon, easily. "We old 
journalists, you know, meet everybody. I 
should be most delighted to have the same 
honour again. General Turnbull, also, it would 
be a gratification to know. The younger mn 

222 



The Correspondent of the Court Journal 

are so interesting. We of the old Fleet Street 
gang lose touch with them." 

"Will you be so good as to step this way ?" said 
the leader of O company. 

"I am always good," said Mr. Pinker. "Lead 



3 



Chapter III  The Great Army of South 

Kensington 

 . i, , , , __ 

THE article from the special correspondent of the Court Journal arrived in 
due course, written on very coarse 
copy-paper in the King's arabesque of handwriting, in which three words filled a page, 
and yet were illegible. Moreover, the contribution was the more perplexing at first 
as it opened with a succession of erased paragraphs. The writer appeared to have attempted 
the article once or twice in several journalistic styles. At the side of one experiment 
was written, "Try American style," and the 
fragment began  

"The King must go. We want gritty men. 
Flapdoodle is all very ... ;" and then broke 
off, followed by the note, "Good sound journalism 
safer. Try it." 

The experiment in good sound journalism 
appeared to begin  

"The greatest of English poets has said that a 
rose by any . . ." 

This also stopped abruptly. The next annotation at the side was almost undecipherable, but 
seemed to be something like  

224 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

"How about old Steevens and the mot juste t 
E.g. . P 

"Morning winked a little wearily at me over 
the curt edge of Campden Hill and its houses 
with their sharp shadows. Under the abrupt 
black cardboard of the outline, it took some 
little time to detect colours; but at length I saw 
a brownish yellow shifting in the obscurity, and 
I knew that it was the guard of Swindon's West 
Kensington army. They are being held as a 
reserve, and lining the whole ridge above the 
Bayswater Road. Their camp and their main 
force is under the great water works tower on 
Campden Hill. I forgot to say that the water 
works tower looked swart. 

"As I passed them and came over the curve 
of Silver Street, I saw the blue cloudy masses of 
Barker's men blocking the entrance to the highroad like a sapphire smoke (good). The disposition of the allied troops, under the general 
management of Mr. Wilson, appears to be as 
follows,  The Yellow Army (if I may so 
describe the West Kensingtonians) lies, as I 
have said, in a strip along the ridge; its furthest 
point westward being the west side of Campden Hill Road, its furthest point eastward 
the beginning of Kensington Gardens. The 
Green Army of Wilson lines the Notting Hill 

225 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

High Road itself from Queen's Road to the corner of Pembridge Road, curving round the 
latter, and extending some three hundred yards 
up towards Westbourne Grove. Westbourne 
Grove itself is occupied by Barker of South Kensington. The fourth side of this rough square, 
the Queen's Road side, is held by some of Buck's 
Purple warriors. 

"The whole resembles some ancient and dainty 
Dutch flower-bed. Along the crest of Campden 
Hill lie the golden crocuses of West Kensington. 
They are, as it were, the first fiery fringe of 
the whole. Northward lies our hyacinth 
Barker, with all his blue hyacinths. Round to 
the south-west run the green rushes of Wilson 
of Bayswater, and a line of violet irises (aptly 
symbolised by Mr. Buck) complete the whole. 
The argent exterior ... (I am losing the style. 
I should have said  Curving with a whisk' 
instead of merely 'Curving.' Also I should 
have called the hyacinths 'sudden.' I cannot keep 
this up. War is too rapid for this style of 
writing. Please ask the office-boy to insert mots 
justes. ) . 

"The truth is that there is nothing to report. 
That commonplace element which is always 
ready to devour all beautiful things (as the 
Black Pig in the Irish Mythology will finally 

226 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

devour the stars and gods) ; that commonplace 
element, as I say, has in its Black Piggish way 
devoured finally the chances of any romance in 
this affair; that which once consisted of absurd 
but thrilling combats in the streets, has degenerated into something which is the very prose of 
warfare  it has degenerated into a siege. A 
siege may be defined as a peace plus the p 
inconvenience of war. Of course Wayne cannot hold out. There is no more chance of 
help from anywhere else than of ships from the 
moon. And if old Wayne had stocked his 
street with tinned meats till all his garrison 
had to sit on them, he couldn't hold out for more 
than a month or two. As a matter of melancholy fact he has done something rather like 
this. He has stocked his street with food 
until there must be uncommonly little room to 
turn round. But what is the good ? To hold out 
for all that time and then to give in of necessity, what does it mean? It means waiting until 
your victories are forgotten and then taking the 
trouble to be defeated. I cannot understand how 
Wayne can be so inartistic. 

"And how odd it is that one views a thing 
quite differently when one knows it is defeated. 
I always thought Wayne was rather fine. But 
now, when I know that he is done for, there seems 

227 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

to be nothing else but Wayne. All the streets 
seem to point at him, all the chimneys seem to 
lean towards him. I suppose it is a morbid feeling ; but Pump Street seems to be the 
only part of London that I feel physically. I 
suppose, I say, that it is morbid. I suppose it is 
exactly how a man feels about his heart when his 
heart is weak. Tump Street'  the heart is a 
pump. And I am drivelling. 

"Our finest leader at the front is beyond all 
question, General Wilson. He has adopted 
alone among the other Provosts the uniform of 
his own halberdiers, although that fine old sixteenth-century garb was not originally intended to 
go with red side-whiskers. It was he who, against 
a most admirable and desperate defence, broke 
last night into Pump Street and held it for at 
least half an hour. He was afterwards expelled 
from it by General Turnbull, of Notting Hill, 
but only after desperate fighting and the sudden 
descent of that terrible darkness which proved so 
much more fatal to the forces of General Buck and 
General Swindon. 

"Provost Wayne himself, with whom I had, 
with great good fortune, a most interesting 
interview, bore the most eloquent testimony to 
the conduct of General Wilson and his men. His 
precise words are as follows:  'I have bought 

228 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

sweets at his funny little shop when I was four 
years old, and ever since. I never noticed 
anything, I am ashamed to say, except that 
he talked through his nose, and didn't wash 
himself particularly. And he came over our barricade like a devil from hell I repeated this 
speech to General Wilson himself, with some 
delicate improvements, and he seemed pleased 
with it. He does not, however, seem pleased 
with anything so much just now as he is with 
the wearing of a sword. I have it from the 
front on the best authority that General 
Wilson was not completely shaved yesterday. It 
is believed in military circles that he is growing a 
moustache. . . . 

"As I have said, there is nothing to report. 
I walk wearily to the pillar-box at the corner 
of Pembridge Road to post my copy. Nothing 
whatever has happened, except the preparations 
for a particularly long and feeble siege, during 
which I trust I shall not be required to be at 
the Front. As I glance up Pembridge Road in 
the growing dusk, the aspect of that road 
reminds me that there is one note worth adding. 
General Buck has suggested, with characteristic 
acumen, to General Wilson, that in order to 
obviate the possibility of such a catastrophe 
as overwhelmed the allied forces in the last 

229 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

advance on Notting Hill (the catastrophe, I 
mean, of the extinguished lamps), that each 
soldier should have a lighted lantern round his 
neck. This is one of the things which I really 
admire about General Buck. He possesses 
what people used to mean by 'the humility of 
the man of science,' that is, he learns steadily 
from his mistakes. Wayne may score off him in 
some other way, but not in that way. The lanterns look like fairy lights as they curve round 
the end of Pembridge Road. 

"Later.  I write with some difficulty, because 
the blood will run down my face and make patterns on the paper. Blood is a very beautiful 
thing; that is why it is concealed. If you 
ask me why blood runs down my face, I can 
only reply that I was kicked by a horse. If 
you ask me what horse, I can reply with some 
pride that it was a war-horse. If you ask me how 
a war-horse came on the scene in our simple 
pedestrian warfare, I am reduced to the necessity, 
so painful to a special correspondent, of recounting my experiences. 

"I was, as I have said, in the very act of posting my copy at the pillar-box, and of glancing 
as I did so up the glittering curve of Pembridge Road, studded with the lights of Wil
230 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

son's men. I don't know what made me pause 
to examine the matter, but I had a fancy 
that the line of lights, where it melted into the 
indistinct brown twilight, was more indistinct than 
usual. I was almost certain that in a certain 
stretch of the road where there had been five 
lights there were now only four. I strained 
my eyes; I counted them again, and there 
were only three. A moment after there were 
only two; an instant after only one; and an 
instant after that the lanterns near to me 
swung like jangled bells, as if struck suddenly. 
They flared and fell; and for the moment the 
fall of them was like the fall of the sun and stars 
out of heaven. It left everything in a primal 
blindness. As a matter of fact, the road was 
not yet legitimately dark. There were still 
red rays of a sunset in the sky, and the 
brown gloaming was still warmed, as it were, 
with a feeling as of firelight. But for three 
seconds after the lanterns swung and sank, I 
saw in front of me a blackness blocking the sky. And with the fourth second I 
knew that this blackness which blocked the sky 
was a man on a great horse; and I was 
trampled and tossed aside as a swirl of horsemen swept round the corner. As they turned 
I saw that they were not black but scarlet; 

231 



OF THE  
UWIVFRCitv 



The Napoleon of dotting Bill 

they were a sortie of the besieged, Wayne riding 
ahead. 

"I lifted myself from the gutter, blinded with 
blood from a very slight skin-wound, and, 
queerly enough, not caring either for the blindness or for the slightness of the wound. For 
one mortal minute after that amazing cavalcade 
had spun past, there was dead stillness on the 
empty road. And then came Barker and all his 
halberdiers running like devils in the track of 
them. It had been their business to guard the 
gate by which the sortie had broken out ; but they 
had not reckoned, and small blame to them, on 
cavalry. As it was, Barker and his men made a 
perfectly splendid run after them, almost catching 
Wayne's horses by the tails. 

"Nobody can understand the sortie. It consists only of a small number of Wayne's 
garrison. Turnbull himself, with the vast mass 
of it, is undoubtedly still barricaded in Pump 
Street. Sorties of this kind are natural enough 
in the majority of historical sieges, such as 
the siege of Paris in 1870, because in such 
cases the besieged are certain of some support 
outside. But what can be the object of it 
in this case? Wayne knows (or if he is too 
mad to know anything, at least Turnbull 
knows) that there is not, and never has been, 

232 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

the smallest chance of support for him outside; 
that the mass of the sane modern inhabitants of 
London regard his farcical patriotism with as 
much contempt as they do the original idiotcy 
that gave it birth  the folly of our miserable 
King. What Wayne and his horsemen are 
doing nobody can even conjecture. The general 
theory round here is that he is simply a traitor, 
and has abandoned the besieged. But all such 
larger but yet more soluble riddles are as 
nothing compared to the one small but unanswerable riddle: Where did they get the 
horses ? 

"Later.  I have heard a most extraordinary 
account of the origin of the appearance of the 
horses. It appears that that amazing person, 
General Turnbull, who is now ruling Pump 
Street in the absence of Wayne, sent out, on 
the morning of the declaration of war, a vast 
number of little boys (or cherubs of the gutter, 
as we pressmen say), with half-crowns in their 
pockets, to take cabs all over London. No less 
than a hundred and sixty cabs met at Pump 
Street; were commandeered by the garrison. 
The men were set free, the cabs used to make 
barricades, and the horses kept in Pump Street, 
where they were fed and exercised for several 

2 33 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

days, until they were sufficiently rapid and 
efficient to be used for this wild ride out of 
the town. If this is so, and I have it on the 
best possible authority, the method of the sortie 
is explained. But we have no explanation of 
its object. Just as Barker's Blues were swinging round the corner after them, they were 
stopped, but not by an enemy; only by the 
voice of one man, and he a friend. Red 
Wilson of Bayswater ran alone along the main 
road like a madman, waving them back with 
a halberd snatched from a sentinel. He was 
in supreme command, and Barker stopped at the 
corner, staring and bewildered. We could hear 
Wilson's voice loud and distinct out of the 
dusk, so that it seemed strange that the great 
voice should come out of the little body. 'Halt, 
South Kensington! Guard this entry, and prevent them returning. I will pursue. Forward, 
the Green Guards!' 

"A wall of dark blue uniforms and a wood 
of pole-axes was between me and Wilson, for 
Barker's men blocked the mouth of the road in 
two rigid lines. But through them and through 
the dusk I could hear the clear orders and the 
clank of arms, and see the green army of Wilson 
marching by towards the west. They were 
our great fighting-men. Wilson had filled 

234 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

them with his own fire; in a few days they had 
become veterans. Each of them wore a silver 
medal of a pump, to boast that they alone 
of all the allied armies had stood victorious in 
Pump Street. 

"I managed to slip past the detachment of 
Barker's Blues, who are guarding the end of 
Pembridge Road, and a sharp spell of running 
brought me to the tail of Wilson's green army 
as it swung down the road in pursuit of the flying 
Wayne. The dusk had deepened into almost 
total darkness; for some time I only heard 
the throb of the marching pace. Then suddenly there was a cry, and the tall fighting 
men were flung back on me, almost crushing 
me, and again the lanterns swung and jingled, 
and the cold nozzles of great horses pushed 
into the press of us. They had turned and 
charged us. 

" 'You fools V came the voice of Wilson, 
cleaving our panic with a splendid cold 
anger. 'Don't you see? the horses have no 
riders V 

"It was true. We were being plunged at by 
a stampede of horses with empty saddles. 
What could it mean? Had Wayne met some 
of our men and been defeated ? Or had he flung 
these horses at us as some kind of ruse or mad 

235 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

new mode of warfare, such as he seemed bent on 
inventing? Or did he and his men want to get 
away in disguise? Or did they want to hide in 
houses somewhere? 

"Never did I admire any man's intellect 
(even my own) so much as I did Wilson's at 
that moment. Without a word, he simply 
pointed the halberd (which he still grasped) to 
the southern side of the road. As you know, 
the streets running up to the ridge of Campden 
Hill from the main road are peculiarly steep, 
they are more like sudden flights of stairs. We 
were just opposite Aubrey Road, the steepest of 
all; up that it would have been far more difficult to urge half-trained horses than to run up on 
one's feet. 

"'Left wheel!' hallooed Wilson. They have 
gone up here,' he added to me, who happened to 
be at his elbow. 

" 'Why?' I ventured to ask. 

"  Can't say for certain,' replied the Bayswater General. They've gone up here in a great 
hurry anyhow. They've simply turned their 
horses loose, because they couldn't take them 
up. I fancy I know. I fancy they're trying 
to get over the ridge to Kensington or Hammersmith, or somewhere, and are striking 
up here because it's just beyond the end of our 

236 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

line. Damned fools, not to have gone further 
along the road, though. They've only just 
shaved our last outpost. Lambert is hardly 
four hundred yards from here. And I've sent 
him word.' 

" ' Lambert !' I said. 'Not young Wilfrid Lambert  my old friend 

" 'Wilfrid Lambert's his name,' said the General; "used to be a 'man about town;' silly 
fellow with a big nose. That kind of man 
always volunteers for some war or other. And 
what's funnier, he generally isn't half bad at it. 
Lambert is distinctly good. The yellow West 
Kensingtons I always reckoned the weakest 
part of the army; but he has pulled them 
together uncommonly well, though he's subordinate to Swindon, who's a donkey. In the 
attack from Pembridge Road the other night he 
showed great pluck.' 

" 'He has shown greater pluck than that I 
said. 'He has criticised my sense of humour. 
That was his first engagement.' 

"This remark was, I am sorry to say, lost on 
the admirable commander of the allied forces. 
We were in the act of climbing the last half of 
Aubrey Road, which is so abrupt a slope that it 
looked like an old-fashioned map leaning up 
against the wall. There are lines of little trees, 

237 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

one above the other, as in the old-fashioned 
map. 

"We reached the top of it, panting somewhat, and were just about to turn the corner 
by a place called (in chivalrous anticipation of 
our wars of sword and axe) Tower Crecy, when 
we were suddenly knocked in the stomach (I 
can use no other term) by a horde of men 
hurled back upon us. They wore the red 
uniform of Wayne; their halberds were broken; 
their foreheads bleeding; but the mere impetus 
of their retreat staggered us as we stood at the 
last ridge of the slope. 

" 'Good old Lambert P yelled out, suddenly, the 
stolid Mr. Wilson of Bayswater, in an uncontrollable excitement. 'Damned jolly old Lambert ! He's got there already ! He's driving them 
back on us! Hurrah! hurrah! Forward the 
Green Guards!'  

"We swung round the corner eastwards, Wilson running first, brandishing the halberd. 

"Will you pardon a little egotism ? Every one 
likes a little egotism, when it takes the form, 
as mine does in this case, of a disgraceful confession. The thing is really a little interesting, 
because it shows how the merely artistic habit 
has bitten into men like me. It was the 
most intensely exciting occurrence that had ever 

238 



ay, almost 

second it i 

of it even \ 

he second I V 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

come to me in my life; and I was really intensely excited about it. And yet, as we turned 
that corner, the first impression I had was of 
something that had nothing to do with the fight 
at all. I was stricken from the sky as by a 
thunderbolt, by the height of the Waterworks 
Tower on Campden Hill. I don't know whether 
Londoners generally realise how high it looks 
when one comes out, in this way, almost 
immediately under it. For the 
seemed to me that at the foot 
human war was a triviality. For the 
felt as if I had been drunk with some trivial 
orgie, and that I had been sobered by the shock 
of that shadow. A moment afterwards, I 
realised that under it was going on something 
more enduring than stone, and something 
wilder than the dizziest height  the agony of 
man. And I knew that compared to that, this 
overwhelming tower was itself a triviality ; it was 
a mere stalk of stone which humanity could snap 
like a stick. 

"I don't know why I have talked so much" about 
this silly old Waterworks Tower, which at the 
very best was only a tremendous background. It was that, certainly, a sombre and 
awful landscape, against which our figures were 
relieved. But I think the real reason was, that 

239 



The Napoleon of Not ting Hill 

there was in my own mind so sharp a transition 
from the tower of stone to the man of flesh. For 
what I saw first when I had shaken off, as it 
were, the shadow of the tower, was a man, and a 
man I knew. 

"Lambert stood at the further corner of the 
street that curved round the tower, his figure 
outlined in some degree by the beginning of 
moonrise. He looked magnificent, a hero; but 
he looked something much more interesting 
than that. He was, as it happened, in almost 
precisely the same swaggering attitude in which 
he had stood nearly fifteen years ago, when he 
swung his walking-stick and struck it into the 
ground, and told me that all my subtlety was 
drivel. And, upon my soul, I think he required 
more courage to say that than to fight as he does 
now. For then he was fighting against something that was in the ascendant, fashionable, and 
victorious. And now he is fighting (at the risk 
of his life, no doubt) merely against something 
which is already dead, which is impossible, 
futile; of which nothing has been more impossible and futile than this very sortie which 
has brought him into contact with it. People 
nowadays allow infinitely too little for the 
psychological sense of victory as a factor in 
affairs. Then he was attacking the degraded 

240 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

but undoubtedly victorious Quin; now he is 
attacking the interesting but totally extinguished 
[Wayne. 

"His name recalls me to the details of the 
scene. The facts were these. A line of red 
halberdiers, headed by Wayne, were marching 
up the street, close under the northern wall, which 
is, in fact, the bottom of a sort of dyke or fortification of the Waterworks. Lambert and his 
yellow West Kensingtons had that instant 
swept round the corner and had shaken the 
Waynites heavily, hurling back a few of the more 
timid, as I have just described, into our 
very arms. When our force struck the tail of 
Wayne's, every one knew that all was up with 
him. His favourite military barber was struck 
down. His grocer was stunned. He himself was hurt in the thigh, and reeled 
back against the wall. We had him in a trap 
with two jaws. 'Is that you?' shouted Lambert, 
genially, to Wilson, across the hemmed-in host 
of Notting Hill. That's about the ticket replied General Wilson; 'keep them under the 
wall.' 

"The men of Notting Hill were falling fast. 
Adam Wayne threw up his long arms to the 
wall above him, and with a spring stood upon 
it, a gigantic figure against the moon. He tore 

241 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

the banner out of the hands of the standardbearer below him, and shook it out suddenly 
above our heads, so that it was like thunder in 
the heavens. 

" 'Round the Red Lion !' he cried. 'Swords 
round the Red Lion! Halberds round the 
Red Lion! They are the thorns round the 
rose.' 

"His voice and the crack of the banner made 
a momentary rally, and Lambert, whose idiotic 
face was almost beautiful with battle, felt it as 
by an instinct, and cried  

" 'Drop your public-house flag, you footler ! 
Drop it!' 

" 'The banner of the Red Lion seldom stoops 
said Wayne, proudly, letting it out luxuriantly on 
the night wind. 

"The next moment I knew that poor Adam's 
sentimental theatricality had cost him much. 
Lambert was on the wall at a bound, his sword 
in his teeth, and had slashed at Wayne's 
head before he had time to draw his sword, 
his hands being busy with the enormous flag. 
He stepped back only just in time to avoid 
the first cut, and let the flag-staff fall, so that 
the spear-blade at the end of it pointed to 
Lambert. 

" 'The banner stoops cried Wayne, in a voice 
242 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

that must have startled streets. 'The banner 
of Notting Hill stoops to a hero And with 
the words he drove the spear-point and half 
the flag-staff through Lambert's body and dropped 
him dead upon the road below, a stone upon the 
stones of the street. 

" 'Notting Hill ! Notting Hill !' cried Wayne, 
in a sort of divine rage. 'Her banner is 
all the holier for the blood of a brave enemy! 
Up on the wall, patriots ! Up on the wall ! Notting Hill r 

"With his long strong arm he actually 
dragged a man up on to the wall to be silhouetted 
against the moon, and more and more men 
climbed up there, pulled themselves and were 
pulled, till clusters and crowds of the halfmassacred men of Pump Street massed upon the 
wall above us. 

" 'Notting Hill ! Notting Hill !' cried Wayne, 
unceasingly. 

" 'Well, what about Bayswater ?' said a worthy 
working-man in Wilson's army, irritably. 'Bayswater for ever!' 

" 'We have won !' cried Wayne, striking 
his flag-staff in the ground. 'Bayswater 
for ever! We have taught our enemies 
patriotism !' 

" 'Oh, cut these fellows up and have done 
243 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

with it!' cried one of Lambert's lieutenants, 
who was reduced to something bordering on 
madness by the responsibility of succeeding to 
the command. 

" 'Let us by all means try said Wilson, 
grimly; and the two armies closed round the 
third. 

"I simply cannot describe what followed. I 
am sorry, but there is such a thing as physical 
fatigue, as physical nausea, and, I may add, as 
physical terror. Suffice it to say that the above 
paragraph was written about n p.m., and that 
it is now about 2 a.m., and that the battle is 
not finished, and is not likely to be. Suffice it 
further to say that down the steep streets which 
lead from the Waterworks Tower to the Notting Hill High Road, blood has been running, 
and is running, in great red serpents, that 
curl out into the main thoroughfare and shine in 
the moon. 

"Later.  The final touch has been given to all 
this terrible futility. Hours have passed; morning has broken ; men are still swaying and fighting at the foot of the tower and round the corner 
of Aubrey Road ; the fight has not finished. But 

I know it is a farce. 

244 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

"News has just come to show that Wayne's 
amazing sortie, followed by the amazing resistance through a whole night on the wall of the 
Waterworks, is as if it had not been. What 
was the object of that strange exodus we shall 
probably never know, for the simple reason that 
every one who knew will probably be cut to 
pieces in the course of the next two or three 
hours. 

"I have heard, about three minutes ago, that 
Buck and Buck's methods have won after all. 
He was perfectly right, of course, when one 
comes to think of it, in holding that it was 
physically impossible for a street to defeat a 
city. While we thought he was patrolling the 
eastern gates with his Purple army; while we 
were rushing about the streets and waving 
halberds and lanterns; while poor old Wilson 
was scheming like Mqltke and fighting like 
Achilles to entrap the wild Provost of Notting 
Hill,  Mr. Buck, retired draper, has simply 
driven down in a hansom cab and done something about as plain as butter and about as 
useful and nasty. He has gone down to South 
Kensington, Brompton, and Fulham, and by 
spending about four thousand pounds of his 
private means, has raised an army of nearly as 
many men; that is to say, an army big enough 

245 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

to beat, not only Wayne, but Wayne and all his 
present enemies put together. The army, I understand, is encamped along High Street, Kensington, and fills it from the Church to Addison Road 
Bridge. It is to advance by ten different roads 
uphill to the north. 

"I cannot endure to remain here. Everything makes it worse than it need be. The 
dawn, for instance, has broken round Campden 
Hill; splendid spaces of silver, edged with 
gold, are torn out of the sky. Worse still, 
Wayne and his men feel the dawn; their faces, 
though bloody and pale, are strangely hopeful 
. . . insupportably pathetic. Worst of all, for 
the moment they are winning. If it were not 
for Buck and the new army they might just, and 
only just, win. 

"I repeat, I cannot stand it. It is like watching that wonderful play of old Maeterlinck's 
(you know my partiality for the healthy, jolly 
old authors of the nineteenth century), in 
which one has to watch the quiet conduct of 
people inside a parlour, while knowing that the 
very men are outside the door whose word can 
blast it all with tragedy. And this is worse, 
for the men are not talking, but writhing and 
bleeding and dropping dead for a thing that is 
already settled  and settled against them. The 

246 



The Great Army of South Kensington 



Lt grey 
;, as it  
will be I 



great grey masses of men still toil and tug and 
sway hither and thither around the great grey 
tower; and the tower is still motionless, 
will always be motionless. These men will 
crushed before the sun is set; and new men 
will arise and be crushed, and new wrongs 
done, and tyranny will always rise again like 
the sun, and injustice will always be as fresh 
as the flowers of spring. And the stone 
tower will always look down on it. Matter, 
in its brutal beauty, will always look down 
on those who are mad enough to consent to 
die, and yet more mad, since they consent to 
live." 

Thus ended abruptly the first and last contribution of the Special Correspondent of the Court 
Journal to that valued periodical. 

The Correspondent himself, as has been said, 
was simply sick and gloomy at the last news of 
the triumph of Buck. He slouched sadly down 
the steep Aubrey Road, up which he had the 
night before run in so unusual an excitement, 
and strolled out into the empty dawn-lit main 
road, looking vaguely for a cab. He saw 
nothing in the vacant space except a blueand-gold glittering thing, running very fast, 
which looked at first like a very tall beetle, 

247 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

but turned out, to his great astonishment, to be 
Barker. 

"Have you heard the good news?" asked that 
gentleman. 

"Yes' said Quin, with a measured voice. "I 
have heard the glad tidings of great joy. Shall 
we take a hansom down to Kensington? I see 
one over there." 

They took the cab, and, were, in four minutes, 
fronting the ranks of the multitudinous and 
invincible army. Quin had not spoken a word 
all the way, and something about him had 
prevented the essentially impressionable Barker 
from speaking either. 

The great army, as it moved up Kensington 
High Street, calling many heads to the numberless windows, for it was long indeed  longer than 
the lives of most of the tolerably young  since 
such an army had been seen in London. Compared with the vast organisation which was now 
swallowing up the miles, with Buck at its head 
as leader, and the King hanging at its tail as 
journalist, the whole story of our problem was 
insignificant. In the presence of that army the 
red Notting Hills and the green Bayswaters 
were alike tiny and straggling groups. In its 
presence the whole struggle round Pump Street 
was like an ant-hill under the hoof of an ox. 

248 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

Every man who felt or looked at that infinity of 
men knew that it was the triumph of Buck's 
brutal arithmetic. Whether Wayne was right 
or wrong, wise or foolish, was quite a fair matter for discussion. But it was a matter oj 
history. At the foot of Church Street, opposij 
Kensington Church, they paused in their glowing 
good humour. 

"Let us send some kind of messenger or herald 
up to them," said Buck, turning to Barker and 
the King. "Let us send and ask them to cave in 
without more muddle." 

"What shall we say to them?" said Barker, 
doubtfully. 

"The facts of the case are quite sufficient," 
rejoined Buck. "It is the facts of the case that 
make an army surrender. Let us simply say 
that our army that is fighting their army, 
and their army that is fighting our army, 
amount altogether to about a thousand men. Say 
that we have four thousand. It is very simple. 
Of the thousand fighting, they have at the 
very most, three hundred, so that, with those 
three hundred, they have now to fight four 
thousand seven hundred men. Let them do it 
if it amuses them." 

And the Provost of North Kensington 
laughed. 

249 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

The herald who was despatched up Church 
Street in all the pomp of the South Kensington 
blue and gold, with the Three Birds on his tabard, 
was attended by two trumpeters. 

"What will they do when they consent?" 
asked Barker, for the sake of saying something in the sudden stillness of that immense 
army. 

"I know my Wayne very well," said Buck, 
laughing. "When he submits he will send a red 
herald flaming with the Lion of Notting Hill. 
Even defeat will be delightful to him, since it is 
formal and romantic." 

The King, who had strolled up to the head of 
the line, broke silence for the first time. 

"I shouldn't wonder," he said, "if he defied 
you, and didn't send the herald after all. I don't 
think you do know your Wayne quite so well as 
you think." 

"All right, your Majesty," said Buck, easily; 
"if it isn't disrespectful, I'll put my political calculations in a very simple form. I'll lay you ten 
pounds to a shilling the herald comes with the 
surrender." 

"All right," said Auberon. "I may be wrong, 
but it's my notion of Adam Wayne that he'll die 
in his city, and that, till he is ckad ? it will not be 
a safe property." 

250 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

"The bet's made, your Majesty," said Buck. 

Another long silence ensued, in the course of 
which Barker alone, amid the motionless 
army, strolled and stamped in his restless 
way. 

Then Buck suddenly leant forward. 

"It's taking your money, your Majesty," he 
said. "I knew it was. There comes the herald 
from Adam Wayne." 

"It's not," cried the King, peering forward also. 
"You brute, it's a red omnibus." 

"It's not," said Buck, calmly; and the King 
did not answer, for down the centre of the spacious and silent Church Street was walking, 
beyond question, the herald of the Red Lion, with 
two trumpeters. 

Buck had something in him which taught 
him how to be magnanimous. In his hour of 
success he felt magnanimous towards Wayne, 
whom he really admired; magnanimous towards 
the King, off whom he had scored so publicly; 
and, above all, magnanimous towards Barker, 
who was the titular leader of this vast South 
Kensington army, which his own talent had 
evoked. 

"General Barker," he said, bowing, "do you 
propose now to receive the message from the besieged ?" 

251 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

Barker bowed also, and advanced towards the 
herald. 

"Has your master, Mr. Adam Wayne, received 
our request for surrender ?" he asked. 

The herald conveyed a solemn and respectful 
affirmative. 

Barker resumed, coughing slightly, but encouraged. 

"What answer does your master send ?" 

The herald again inclined himself submissively, and answered in a kind of monotone. 

"My message is this. Adam Wayne, Lord 
High Provost of Notting Hill, under the 
charter of King Auberon and the laws of God 
and all mankind, free and of a free city, greets 
James Barker, Lord High Provost of South 
Kensington, by the same rights free and 
honourable, leader of the army of the South. 
With all friendly reverence, and with all constitutional consideration, he desires James 
Barker to lay down his arms, and the whole 
army under his command to lay down their 
arms also." 

Before the words were ended the King had 
run forward into the open space with shining 
eyes. The rest of the staff and the forefront 
of the army were literally struck breathless. 

252 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

When they recovered they began to laugh 
beyond restraint; the revulsion was too 
sudden. 

"The Lord High Provost of Notting Hill," 
continued the herald, "does not propose, in the 
event of your surrender, to use his victory for 
any of those repressive purposes which others 
have entertained against him. He will leave you 
your free laws and your free cities, your flags 
and your governments. He will not destroy the 
religion of South Kensington, or crush the old 
customs of Bays water." 

An irrepressible explosion of laughter went up 
from the forefront of the great army. 

"The King must have had something to do 
with this humour," said Buck, slapping his thigh. 
"It's too deliciously insolent. Barker, have a glass 
of wine." 

And in his conviviality he actually sent a 
soldier across to the restaurant opposite the 
church and brought out two glasses for a 
toast. 

When the laughter had died down, the herald 
continued quite monotonously  

"In the event of your surrendering your 
arms and dispersing under the superintendence 
of our forces, these local rights of yours shall 
be carefully observed. In the event of your 

253 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

not doing so, the Lord High Provost of Notting Hill desires to announce that he has just 
captured the Waterworks Tower, just above 
you, on Campden Hill, and that within ten minutes from now, that is, on the reception 
through me of your refusal, he will open the great 
reservoir and flood the whole valley where you 
stand in thirty feet of water. God save King 
Auberon !" 

Buck had dropped his glass and sent a great 
splash of wine over the road. 

"But  but  " he said ; and then by a last and 
splendid effort of his great sanity, looked the facts 
in the face. 

"We must surrender, ,, he said. "You could 
do nothing against fifty thousand tons of 
water coming down a steep hill, ten minutes 
hence. We must surrender. Our four thousand 
men might as well be four. Vicisti Galilcee! Perkins, you may as well get me another glass of 
wine." 

In this way the vast army of South Kensington surrendered and the Empire of Notting Hill 
began. One further fact in this connection 
is perhaps worth mentioning  the fact that, 
after his victory, Adam Wayne caused the 
great tower on Campden Hill to be plated with 
gold and inscribed with a great epitaph, saying 

254 



The Great Army of South Kensington 

that it was the monument of Wilfrid Lambert, 
the heroic defender of the place, and surmounted with a statue, in which his large 
nose was done something less than justice to. 



255 



BOOK V 



Chapter I  "The Empire of Notting 
Hill" 

ON the evening of the third of October, twenty years after the great 
victory of Notting Hill, which 
gave it the dominion of London, King 
Auberon, came, as of old, out of Kensington Palace. 

He had changed little, save for a streak or 
two of grey in his hair, for his face had always 
been old, and his step slow, and, as it were, 
decrepit. 

If he looked old, it was not because of anything physical or mental. It was because he 
still wore, with a quaint conservatism, the 
frock-coat and high hat of the days before the 
great war. "I have survived the Deluge," he 
said. "I am a pyramid, and must behave as 
such." 

As he passed up the street the Kensingtonians, 
in their picturesque blue smocks, saluted him 
as a King, and then looked after him as a 
curiosity. It seemed odd to them that men had 
once worn so elvish an attire. 

The King, cultivating the walk attributed to 
the oldest inhabitant ("Gaffer Auberon" his 

259 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

friends were now confidentially desired to call 
him), went toddling northward. He paused, 
with reminiscence in his eye, at the Southern 
Gate of Notting Hill, one of those nine great 
gates of bronze and steel, wrought with reliefs 
of the old battles, by the hand of Chiffy himself. 

"Ah!" he said, shaking his head and assuming an unnecessary air of age, and a provincialism 
of accent, "Ah! I mind when there warn't none 
of this here." 

He passed through the Ossington Gate, surmounted by a great lion, wrought in red copper 
on yellow brass, with the motto, "Nothing 111." 
The guard in red and gold saluted him with his 
halberd. 

It was about sunset, and the lamps were 
being lit. Auberon paused to look at them, for 
they were Chiffy's finest work, and his artistic 
eye never failed to feast on them. In memory 
of the Great Battle of the Lamps, each great 
iron lamp was surmounted by a veiled figure, 
sword in hand, holding over the flame an iron 
hood or extinguisher, as if ready to let it fall 
if the armies of the South and West should 
again show their flags in the city. Thus no 
child in Notting Hill could play about the 
streets without the very lamp-posts reminding 

260 



The Empire of Notting Hill 



him of the salvation of his country in the dreadful year. 

"Old Wayne was right in a way," commented the King. "The sword does make 
things beautiful. It has made the whole world romantic by now. And to think people once 
thought me a buffoon for suggesting a romantic 
Notting Hill. Deary me, deary me (I think 
that is the expression). It seems like a previous 
existence. ,, 

Turning a corner he found himself in Pump 
Street, opposite the four shops which Adam 
Wayne had studied twenty years before. He 
entered idly the shop of Mr. Mead, the grocer. 
Mr. Mead was somewhat older, like the rest of 
the world, and his red beard, which he now 
wore with a moustache, and long and full, was 
partly blanched and discoloured. He was 
dressed in a long and richly embroidered robe 
of blue, brown, and crimson, interwoven with 
an Eastern complexity of pattern, and covered 
with obscure symbols and pictures, representing 
his wares passing from hand to hand and from 
nation to nation. Round his neck was the 
chain with the Blue Argosy cut in turquoise, 
which he wore as Grand Master of the Grocers. 
The whole shop had the sombre and sumptuous 
look of its owner. The wares were displayed 

261 



The Napoleo?i of Notting Hill 

as prominently as in the old days, but they 
were now blended and arranged with a sense of 
tint and grouping, too often neglected by the 
dim grocers of those forgotten days. The 
wares were shown plainly, but shown not so 
much as an old grocer would have shown his 
stock, but rather as an educated virtuoso would 
have shown his treasures. The tea was stored 
in great blue and green vases, inscribed with the 
nine indispensable sayings of the wise men of 
China. Other vases of a confused orange and 
purple, less rigid and dominant, more humble 
and dreamy, stored symbolically the tea of India. 
A row of caskets of a simple silvery metal 
contained tinned meats. Each was wrought 
with some rude but rhythmic form, as a shell, a 
horn, a fish, or an apple, to indicate what material 
had been canned in it. 

"Your Majesty," said Mr. Mead, sweeping an Oriental reverence. "This is an 
honour to me, but yet more an honour to 
the city." 

Auberon took off his hat. 

"Mr. Mead," he said, "Notting Hill, 
whether in giving or taking, can deal in 
nothing but honour. Do you happen to sell 
liquorice ?" 

"Liquorice, sire," said Mr. Mead, "is not the 
262 



The Empire of Notling Hill 



least important of our benefits out of the dark 
heart of Arabia." 

And going reverently towards a green and silver canister, made in the form of an Arabian 
mosque, he proceeded to serve his customer. 

"I was just thinking, Mr. Mead," said the 
King reflectively, "I don't know why I should 
think about it just now, but I was just thinking of 
twenty years ago. Do you remember the times 
before the war?" 

The grocer, having wrapped up the liquorice 
sticks in a piece of paper (inscribed with some 
appropriate sentiment), lifted his large grey 
eyes dreamily, and looked at the darkening sky 
outside. 

"Oh yes, your Majesty," he said. "I remember these streets before the Lord Provost began to rule us. I can't remember how we felt 
very well. All the great songs and the fighting change one so; and I don't think we can 
really estimate all we owe to the Provost; but 
I can remember his coming into this very shop 
twenty-two years ago, and I remember the 
things he said. The singular thing is that 
as far as I remember I thought the things he 
said odd at that time. Now it's the things that 
I said, as far as I can recall them, that seem to 
me odd  as odd as a madman's antics." 

263 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

"Ah!" said the King; and looked at him with 
f an unfathomable quietness. 

"I thought nothing of being a grocer then," 
hd said. "Isn't that odd enough for anybody? 
I thought nothing of all the wonderful places 
that my goods come from, and wonderful ways 
that they are made. I did not know that I was 
for all practical purposes a king with slaves 
spearing fishes near the secret-pool, and gathering fruits in the islands under the world. My 
mind was a blank on the thing. I was as mad as 
a hatter." 

The King turned also, and stared out into the 
dark, where the great lamps that commemorated 
the battle were already flaming. 

"And is this the end of poor old Wayne?" 
he said, half to himself. "To inflame every 
one so much that he is lost himself in the blaze. 
Is this his victory, that he, my incomparable 
Wayne, is now only one in a world of Waynes? 
Has he conquered and become by conquest com monplace? Must Mr. Mead, the grocer, talk as 
high as he? Lord ! what a strange world in which 
a man cannot remain unique even by taking the 
J " trouble to go mad." 

And he went dreamily out of the shop. 

He paused outside the next one almost precisely as the Provost had done two decades before. 

264
"A FINE EVENING SIR,"

The Empire of Notting Hill

"How uncommonly creepy this shop looks," 
he said. "But yet somehow encouragingly 
creepy, invitingly creepy. It looks like something in a jolly old nursery story in which you 
are frightened out of your skin, and yet know 
that things always end well. The way those 
low sharp gables are carved like great black 
bat's wings folded down, and the way those 
queer-coloured bowls underneath are made to 
shine like giant's eye-balls. It looks like a 
benevolent warlock's hut. It is apparently a 
chemist's." 

Almost as he spoke, Mr. Bowles, the chemist, 
came to his shop door in a long black velvet 
gown and hood, monastic as it were, but yet 
with a touch of the diabolic. His hair was 
still quite black, and his face even paler than of 
old. The only spot of colour he carried was a 
red star cut in some precious stone of strong 
tint, hung on his breast. He belonged to the 
Society of the Red Star of Charity, founded on 
the lamps displayed by doctors and chemists. 

"A fine evening, sir," said the chemist. 
"Why, I can scarcely be mistaken in supposing 
it to be your Majesty. Pray step inside and 
shaj a bottle of sal-volatile, or anything that 
may take your fancy. As it happens there is 
aft old acquaintance of your Majesty's in my 

265 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

shop carousing (if I may be permitted the term) 
upon that beverage at this moment." 

The King entered the shop, which was an 
Aladdin's garden of shades and hues, for as the 
chemist's scheme of colour was more brilliant than 
the grocer's scheme, so it was arranged with even 
more delicacy and fancy. Never, if the phrase 
may be employed, had such a nosegay of medi cines been presented to the artistic eye. 

But even the solemn rainbow of that evening 
interior was rivalled or even eclipsed by the 
figure standing in the centre of the shop. His 
form, which was a large and stately one, was 
clad in a brilliant blue velvet, cut in the richest 
Renaissance fashion, and slashed so as to show 
gleams and gaps of a wonderful lemon or pale 
yellow. He had several chains round his neck 
and his plumes, which were of several tints of 
bronze and gold, hung down to the great gold 
hilt of his long sword. He was drinking a 
dose of sal-volatile, and admiring its opal tint. 
The King advanced with a slight mystification 
towards the tall figure, whose face was in shadow, 
then he said  

"By the Great Lord of Luck, Barker!" 

The figure removed his plumed cap, showing 
the same dark head and long, almost ejjuine, 
face which the King had so often seen fWg 

266 



The Empire of Notting Hill 



out of the high collar of Bond Street. Except 
for a grey patch on each temple, it was totally 
unchanged. 

"Your Majesty," said Barker, "this is a 
meeting nobly retrospective, a meeting that has 
about it a certain October gold. I drink to old 
days ;" and he finished his sal-volatile with simple 
feelingf. 

T! am delighted to see you again, Barker," 
said the King. "It is, indeed, long since we 
met. What with my travels in Asia Minor, 
and my book having to be written (you have 
read my 'Life of Prince Albert for Children of 
course), we have scarcely met twice since the 
Great War. That is twenty years ago." 

"I wonder," said Barker, thoughtfully, "if I 
might speak freely to your Majesty." 

"Well," said Auberon, "it's rather late in the 
day to start speaking respectfully. Flap away, my 
bird of freedom." 

"Well, your Majesty," replied Barker, lowering his voice, "I don't think it will be so long to 
the next war." 

"What do you mean?" asked Auberon. 

"We will stand this insolence no longer," 
burst out Barker, fiercely. "We are not slaves 
because Adam Wayne twenty years ago cheated 
us with a water-pipe. Notting Hill is Notting 

>7 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

Hill; it is not the world. We in South 
Kensington, we also have memories  aye, and 
hopes. If they fought for these trumpery 
shops and a few lamp-posts, shall we not fight 
for the great High Street and the sacred Natural 
History Museum ?" 

"Great Heavens!" said the astounded Auberon. "Will wonders never cease? Have the 
two greatest marvels been achieved? Have 
you turned altruistic, and has Wayne turned 
seMsh ? Are  you the patriot, and he the 
tyrant?" 

"It is not from Wayne himself altogether that 
the evil comes," answered Barker. "He, indeed, is now mostly wrapped in dreams, and 
sits with his old sword beside the fire. But 
Notting Hill is the tyrant, your Majesty. Its 
Council and its crowds have been so intoxicated 
by the spreading over the whole city of Wayne's 
old ways and visions, that they try to meddle 
with every one, and rule every one, and civilise 
every one, and tell every one what is good for 
him. I do not deny the great impulse which 
his old war, wild as it seemed, gave to the civic 
life of our time. It came when I was still a 
young man, and I admit it enlarged my career. 
But we are not going to see our own cities 
flouted and thwarted from day to day because 

268 



The Empire of Hotting Hill 



of something Wayne did for us all nearly a 
quarter of a century ago. I am just waiting 
here for news upon this very matter. It is 
rumoured that Notting Hill has vetoed the 
statue of General Wilson they are putting up 
opposite Chepstow Place. If that is so, it is 
a black and white shameless breach of the terms 
on which we surrendered to Turnbull after the 
battle of the Tower. We were to keep our 
own customs and self-government. If that 
is so  " 

"It is so," said a deep voice; and both men 
turned round. 

A burly figure in purple robes, with a silver 
eagle hung round his neck and moustaches 
almost as florid as his plumes, stood in the 
doorway. 

"Yes," he said, acknowledging the King's start, 
"I am Provost Buck, and the news is true. These 
men of the Hill have forgotten that we fought 
round the Tower as well as they did, and 
that it is sometimes foolish, as well as base, to 
despise the conquered." 

"Let us step outside," said Barker, with a grim 
composure. 

Buck did so, and stood rolling his eyes up and 
down the lamp-lit street. 

"I would like to have a go at smashing all 
269 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

this," he muttered, "though I am over sixty. I 
would like  " 

His voice ended in a cry, and he reeled back a 
step, with his hands to his eyes, as he had done 
in those streets twenty years before. 

"Darkness !" he cried  "darkness again ! What 
does it mean ?" 

For in truth every lamp in the street had 
gone out, so that they could not see even each 
other's outline, except faintly. The voice of the 
chemist came with startling cheerfulness out of 
the density. 

"Oh, don't you know?" he said. "Did they 
never tell you this is the Feast of the Lamps, 
the anniversary of the great battle that almost 
lost and just saved Notting Hill? Don't you 
know, your Majesty, that on this night twenty-one years ago we saw Wilson's green uniforms charging down this street, and driving 
Wayne and Turnbull back upon the gas-works, 
righting with their handful of men like fiends from 
hell? And that then, in that great hour, Wayne 
sprang through a window of the gas-works, 
with one blow of his hand brought darkness on 
the whole city, and then with a cry like a 
lion's, that was heard through four streets, flew 
at Wilson's men, sword in hand, and swept 
them, bewildered as they were, and ignorant of 

270 



The Empire of Notting Hill 



the map, clear out of the sacred street again ? And 
don't you know that upon that night every year 
all lights are turned out for half an hour while 
we sing the Notting Hill anthem in the darkness ? 
Hark ! there it begins." 

Through the night came a crash of drums, and 
then a strong swell of human voices  



"When the world was in the balance, there was night on 

Notting Hill, 
(There was night on Notting Hill): it was nobler than the 

day; 
On the cities where the lights are and the firesides glow. 
From the seas and from the deserts came the thing we did 

not know, 
Came the darkness, came the darkness, came the darkness 
on the foe, 
And the old guard of God turned to bay. 
For the old guard of God turns to bay, turns to bay, 
And the stars fall down before it ere its banners fall to-day. 
For when armies were arcund us as a howling and a horde, 
When falling was the citadel and broken was the sword, 
The darkness came upon them like the Dragon of the Lord, 
When the old guard of God turned to bay." 



The voices were just uplifting themselves in a 
second verse, when they were stopped by a scurry 
and a yell. Barker had bounded into the street 
with a cry of "South Kensington!" and a 
drawn dagger. In less time than man could 
blink, the whole packed street was full of curses 
and struggling. Barker was flung back against 

271 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

the shop-front, but used the second only to draw 
his sword as well as his dagger, and calling out, 
"This is not the first time I've come through the 
thick of you," flung himself again into the press. 
It was evident that he had drawn blood at last, 
for a more violent outcry arose, and many other 
knives and swords were discernible in the faint 
light. Barker, after having wounded more than 
one man, seemed on the point of being flung 
back again, when Buck suddenly stepped out 
into the street. He had no weapon, for he 
affected rather the peaceful magnificence of the 
great burgher, than the pugnacious dandyism 
which had replaced the old sombre dandyism 
in Barker. But with a blow of his clenched 
fist he broke the pane of the next shop, which 
was the old curiosity shop, and, plunging in his 
hand, snatched a kind of Japanese scimitar, and 
calling out, "Kensington ! Kensington !" rushed to 
Barker's assistance. 

Barker's sword was broken, but he was laying 
about him with his dagger. Just as Buck ran 
up, a man of Notting Hill struck Barker down, 
but Buck struck the man down on top of him, 
and Barker sprang up again, the blood running 
down his face. 

Suddenly all these cries were cloven by a 
great voice, that seemed to fall out of heaven. 

272 



The Empire of Notting Hill 



It was terrible to Buck and Barker and the King 
from its seeming to come out the empty skies; 
but it was more terrible because it was a familiar 
voice, and one which at the same time they had 
not heard for so long. 

"Turn up the lights' said the voice from 
above them, and for a moment there was no reply, 
but only, a tumult. 

"In the name of Notting Hill, and of the great 
Council of the City, turn up the lights." 

There was again a tumult and a vagueness 
for a moment, then the whole street and every 
object in it sprang suddenly out of the darkness, 
as every lamp sprang into life. And looking up 
they saw, standing upon a balcony near the roof 
of one of the highest houses, the figure and the 
face of Adam Wayne, his red hair blowing behind 
him, a little streaked with grey. 

"What is this, my people?" he said. "Is it 
altogether impossible to make a thing good 
without it immediately insisting on being 
wicked? The glory of Notting Hill in having 
achieved its independence, has been enough 
for me to dream of for many years, as I sat 
beside the fire. Is it really not enough for 
you, who have had so many other affairs to 
excite and distract you? Notting Hill is a 
nation. Why should it condescend to be a 

273 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

mere Empire? You wish to pull down the 
statue of General Wilson, which the men of 
Bayswater have so rightly erected in Westbourne Grove. Fools! Who erected that 
statue? Did Bayswater erect it? No. Notting Hill erected it. Do you not see that it is 
the glory of our achievement that we have 
infected the other cities with the idealism of 
Notting Hill? It is we who have created not 
only our own side, but both sides of this controversy. O too humble fools  why should you 
wish to destroy your enemies? You have done 
something more to them. You have created your 
enemies. You wish to pull down that gigantic 
silver hammer, which stands, like an obelisk, in 
the centre of the Broadway of Hammersmith. 
Fools! Before Notting Hill arose, did any 
person passing through Hammersmith Broadway expect to see there a gigantic silver hammer ? 
You wish to abolish the great bronze figure of 
a knight standing upon the artificial bridge at 
Knightsbridge. Fools! Who would have 
thought of it before Notting Hill arose? I 
have even heard, and with deep pain I have 
heard it, that the evil eye of our imperial 
envy has been cast towards the remote horizon 
of the west, and that we have objected to the 
great black monument of a crowned raven, 

274 



The Empire of dotting Hill 



which commemorates the skirmish of Ravenscourt Park. Who created all these things? 
Were they there before we came? Cannot 
you be content with that destiny which was 
enough for Athens, which was enough for 
Nazareth? the destiny, the humble purpose 
of creating a new world. Is Athens angry 
because Romans and Florentines have adopted 
her phraseology for expressing their own 
patriotism? Is Nazareth angry because as a 
little village it has become the type of all little 
villages out of which, as the Snobs say, no good 
can come? Has Athens asked every one to 
wear the chlamys? Are all followers of the 
Nazarene compelled to wear turbans? No! 
but the soul of Athens went forth and made 
men drink hemlock, and the soul of Nazareth 
went forth and made men consent to be crucified. So has the soul of Notting Hill gone 
forth and made men realise what it is to 
live in a city. Just as we inaugurated our 
symbols and ceremonies, so they have inaugurated theirs; and are you so mad as to contend against them? Notting Hill is right; it 
has always been right. It has moulded itself on 
its own necessities, its own sine qua non, 
it has accepted its own ultimatum. Because 
it is a nation it has created itself. And 

275 



The Napoleon of Not ting Hill 

because it is a nation it can destroy itself. 
Notting Hill shall always be the judge. If 
it is your will because of this matter of 
General Wilson's statue to make war upon 
Bayswater  " 

A roar of cheers broke in upon his words, 
and further speech was impossible. Pale to 
the lips, the great patriot tried again and again 
to speak; but even his authority could not keep 
down the dark and roaring masses in the 
street below him. He said something further, 
but it was not audible. He descended at last 
sadly from the garret in which he lived, and 
mingled with the crowd at the foot of the houses. 
Finding General Turnbull, he put his hand on 
his shoulder with a queer affection and gravity, 
and said  

"To-morrow, old man, we shall have a new 
experience, as fresh as the flowers of spring. 
We shall be defeated. You and I have been 
through three battles together, and have somehow or other missed this peculiar delight. It 
is unfortunate that we shall not probably be 
able to exchange our experiences, because, as it 
most annoyingly happens, we shall probably both 
be dead." 

Turnbull looked dimly surprised. 

"I don't mind so much about being dead," he 
276 



The Empire of dotting Hill 



said, "but why should you say that we shall be 
defeated?" 

"The answer is very simple," replied Wayne, 
calmly. "It is because we ought to be defeated. # 
We have been in the most horrible holes before 
now; but in all those I was perfectly certain 
that the stars were on our side, and that we ought 
to get out. Now, I know that we ought not to 
get out ; and that takes away from me everything 
with which I won." 

As Wayne spoke he started a little, for both 
men became aware that a third figure was listening to them  a small figure with wondering 
eyes. 

"Is it really true, my dear Wayne," said the 
King, interrupting, "that you think you will be 
beaten to-morrow?" 

"There can be no doubt about it whatever," 
replied Adam Wayne; "the real reason is the one 
of which I have just spoken. But as a concession to your materialism, I will add that they 
have an organised army of a hundred allied cities 
against our one. That in itself, however, would 
be unimportant." 

Quin, with his round eyes, seemed strangely 
insistent. 

"You are quite sure," he said, "that you must 
be beaten?" 

277 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

"I am afraid," said Turnbull, gloomily, "that 
there can be no doubt about it." 

"Then," cried the King, flinging out his 
'arms, "give me a halberd! Give me a halberd, 
somebody! I desire all men to witness that I, 
Auberon, King of England, do here and now 
abdicate and implore the Provost of Notting Hill 
to permit me to enlist in his army. Give me a 
halberd!" 

He seized one from some passing guard, and, 
shouldering it, stamped solemnly after the shouting columns of halberdiers which were, by this 
time, parading the streets. He had, however, 
nothing to do with the wrecking of the statue 
of General Wilson, which took place before 
morning. 



278 



Chapter II  The Last Battle 

THE day was cloudy when Wayne went 
down to die with all his army in 
Kensington Gardens; it was cloudy 
again when that army had been swallowed up by the vast armies of a new world. 
There had been an almost uncanny interval 
of sunshine, in which the Provost of Notting 
Hill, with all the placidity of an onlooker, had 
gazed across to the hostile armies on the 
great spaces of verdure opposite; the long 
strips of green and blue and gold lay 
across the park in squares and oblongs 
like a proposition in Euclid wrought in a 
rich embroidery. But the sunlight was a 
weak and, as it were, a wet sunlight, and 
was soon swallowed up. Wayne spoke to 
the King, with a queer sort of coldness and 
languor, as to the military operations. It was 
as he had said the night before, that being 
deprived of his sense of an impracticable rectitude he was, in effect, being deprived of 
everything. He was out of date, and at sea in 
a mere world of compromise and competition, 
of Empire against Empire, of the tolerably right 
and the tolerably wrong. When his eye fell on 

279 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

the King, however, who was marching very 
gravely with a top hat and a halberd, it 
brightened slightly. 

"Well, your Majesty," he said, "you at least 
ought to be proud to-day. If your children 
are fighting each other, at least those who 
win are your children. Other kings have distributed justice, you have distributed life. 
Other kings have ruled a nation, you have 
created nations. Others have made kingdoms, 
you have begotten them. Look at your children, 
father." And he stretched his hand out towards 
the enemy. 

Auberon did not raise his eyes. 

"See how splendidly," cried Wayne, "the new 
cities come on  the new cities from across the 
river. See where Battersea advances over 
there  under the flag of the Lost Dog; and 
Putney  don't you see the Man on the White 
Boar shining on their standard as the sun 
catches it? It is the coming of a new age, your 
Majesty. Notting Hill is not a common emtf pire; it is a thing like Athens, the mother of 
a mode of life, of a manner. of living, which 
shall renew the youth of the world  a thing 
like Nazareth. When I was young I remember, in the old dreary days, wiseacres used to 
write books about how trains would get faster, 

28Q 



The Last Battle 



and all the world would be one empire, and 
tram-cars go to the moon. And even as a child 
I used to say to myself, Tar more likely 
that we shall go on the crusades again, or 
worship the gods of the city.' And so it has 
been. And I am glad, though this is my last 
battle." 

Even as he spoke there came a crash of steel 
from the left, and he turned his head. 

"Wilson!" he cried, with a kind of joy. 
"Red Wilson has charged our left. No one 
can hold him in; he eats swords. He is as keen 
a soldier as Turnbull, but less patient  less 
really great. Ha! and Barker is moving. 
How Barker has improved; how handsome he looks. It is not all having plumes; 
it is also having a soul in one's daily life. 
Ha!" 

And another crash of steel on the right 
showed that Barker had closed with Notting 
Hill on the other side. 

"Turnbull is there!" cried Wayne. "See 
him hurl them back! Barker is checked! 
Turnbull charges  wins! But our left is 
broken. Wilson has smashed Bowles and 
Mead, and may turn our flank. Forward, the 
Provost's Guard!" 

And the whole centre moved forward, 
381 



Ik 



The Napoleon of dotting Hill 

Wayne's face and hair and sword flaming in 
the van. 

The King ran suddenly forward. 

The next instant a great jar that went through 
it told that it had met the enemy. And right 
over against them through the wood of their own 
weapons Auberon saw the Purple Eagle of Buck 
of North Kensington. 

On the left Red Wilson was storming the 
broken ranks, his little green figure conspicuous 
even in the tangle of men and weapons, with 
the flaming red moustaches and the crown of 
laurel. Bowles slashed at his head and tore away 
some of the wreath, leaving the rest bloody, 
and, with a roar like a bull's, Wilson sprang at 
him, and, after a rattle of fencing, plunged his 
point into the chemist, who fell, crying 
"Notting Hill!" Then the Notting Hillers 
wavered, and Bayswater swept them back in confusion. Wilson had carried everything before 
him. 

On the right, however, Turnbull had carried 
the Red Lion banner with a rush against 
Barker's men, and the banner of the Golden 
Birds bore up with difficulty against it. 
Barker's men fell fast. In the centre Wayne 
and Buck were engaged, stubborn and confused. 
So far as the fighting went, it was precisely 

282 



The Last Battle 



equal. But the fighting was a farce. For behind 
the three small armies with which Wayne's 
small army was engaged lay the great sea 
of the allied armies, which looked on as yet as 
scornful spectators, but could have broken all four 
armies by moving a finger. 

Suddenly they did move. Some of the front 
contingents, the pastoral chiefs from Shepherd's 
Bush, with their spears and fleeces, were seen 
advancing, and the rude clans from Paddington 
Green. They were advancing for a very good 
reason. Buck, of North Kensington, was signalling wildly; he was surrounded, and totally 
cut off. His regiments were a struggling 
mass of people, islanded in a red sea of Notting 
Hill. 

The allies had been too careless and confident. 
They had allowed Barker's force to be broken 
to pieces by Turnbull, and the moment that 
was done, the astute old leader of Notting Hill 
swung his men round and attacked Buck behind 
and on both sides. At the same moment Wayne 
cried "Charge!" and struck him in front like a 
thunderbolt. 

Two-thirds of Buck's men were cut to pieces 
before their allies could reach them. Then the 
sea of cities came on with their banners like 
breakers, and swallowed Notting Hill for ever. 

283 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

The battle was not over, for not one of Wayne's 
meir would surrender, and it lasted till sundown, 
and long after. But it was decided ; the story of 
Notting Hill was ended. 

When Turnbull saw it, he ceased a moment 
from fighting, and looked round him. The evening sunlight struck his face; it looked like a 
child's. 

"I have had my youth," he said. Then 
snatching an axe from a man, he dashed into 
the thick of the spears of Shepherd's Bush, 
and died .somewhere far in the depths of their 
reeling ranks. Then the battle roared on; 
every man of Notting Hill was slain before 
night. 

Wayne was standing by a tree alone after the 
battle. Several men approached him with axes. 
One struck at him. His foot seemed partly to 
slip ; but he flung his hand out, and steadied himself against the tree. 

Barker sprang after him, sword in hand, and 
shaking with excitement. 

"How large now, my lord," he cried, "is the 
Empire of Notting Hill?" 

Wayne smiled in the gathering dark. 

"Always as large as this," he said, and 
swept his sword round in a semi-circle of 
silver. 



The Last Battle 



Barker dropped, wounded in the neck; and 
Wilson sprang over his body like a tiger-cat, 
rushing at Wayne. At the same moment there 
came behind the Lord of the Red Lion a cry 
and a flare of yellow, and a mass of the West 
Kensington halberdiers ploughed up the slope, 
knee-deep in grass, bearing the yellow banner of the city before them, and shouting 
aloud. 

At the same second Wilson went down 
under Wayne's sword, seemingly smashed 
like a fly. The great sword rose again like a 
bird, but Wilson seemed to rise with it, and, his 
sword being broken, sprang at Wayne's throat 
like a dog. The foremost of the yellow halberdiers had reached the tree and swung his 
axe above the struggling Wayne. With a 
curse the King whirled up his own halberd and 
dashed the blade in the man's face. He 
reeled, and rolled down the slope, just as the 
furious Wilson was flung on his back again. 
And again he was on his feet, and again 
at Wayne's throat. Then he was flung again, 
but this time laughing triumphantly. Grasped 
in his hand was the red and yellow favour 
that Wayne wore as Provost of Notting Hill. 
He had torn it from the place where it had been 
carried for twenty-five years. 

285 




The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

With a shout the West Kensington men 
closed round Wayne, the great yellow banner 
flapping over his head. 

"Where is your favour now, Provost?" cried 
the West Kensington leader. 
" And a laugh went up. 

Adam struck at the standard-bearer and 
brought him reeling forward. As the banner 
stooped, he grasped the yellow folds and tore off 
a shred. A halberdier struck him on the shoulder, wounding bloodily. 

"Here is one colour !" he cried, pushing the 
yellow into his belt; "and here!" he cried, 
pointing to his own blood, " Here is the 
other." 

At the same instant the shock of a sudden 
and heavy halberd laid the King stunned or 
dead. In the wild visions of vanishing consciousness, he saw again something that belonged to an 
utterly forgotten time, something that he had 
seen somewhere long ago in a restaurant. He 
 saw, with his swimming eyes, red and yellow, 
the colours of Nicaragua. 

Quin did not see the end. Wilson, wild with 
joy, sprang again at Adam Wayne, and the 
great sword of Notting Hill was whirled above 
once more. Then men ducked instinctively at 
the rushing noise of the sword coming down 

286 



The Last Battle 



out of the sky, and Wilson of Bayswater was 
smashed and wiped down upon the floor like a 
fly. Nothing was left of him but a wreck; but 
the blade that had broken him was broken. In 
dying he had snapped the great sword and the 
spell of it ; the sword of Wayne was broken at the 
hilt. One rush of the enemy carried Wayne by 
force against the tree. They were too close to 
use halberd or even sword; they were breast to 
breast, even nostrils to nostrils. But Buck got 
his dagger free. 

"Kill him!" he cried, in a strange stifled 
voice. "Kill him! Good or bad, he is none 
of us ! Do not be blinded by the face ! . . . God ! 
have we not been blinded all along !" and he 
drew his arm back for a stab and seemed to close 
his eyes. 

Wayne did not drop the hand that hung on 

to the tree-branch. But a mighty heave went 

over his breast and his whole huge figure, 

like an earthquake over great hills. And with 

that convulsion of effort he rent the branch 

out of the tree, with tongues of torn 

wood. And swaying it once only, he let the 

splintered club fall on Buck, breaking his 

neck. The planner of the Great Road fell 

face foremost dead, with his dagger in a grip of 

steel. 

287 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

"For you and me, and for all brave men, my 
brother," said Wayne, in his strange chant, 
"there is good wine poured in the inn at the end 
of the world." 

The packed men made another lurch or 
heave towards him; it was almost too dark 
to fight clearly. . He caught hold of the oak 
again, this time getting his hand into a wide 
crevice and grasping, as it were, the bowels 
of the tree. The whole crowd, numbering 
some thirty men, made a rush to tear him 
away from it; they hung on with all their 
weight and numbers, and nothing stirred. A 
solitude could not have been stiller than that 
group of straining men. Then there was a faint 
sound. 

"His hand is slipping," cried two men in exultation. 

"You don't know much of him," said another, 
grimly (a man of the old war). "More likely 
his bone cracks." 

"It is neither  by God, it is neither!" said one 
of the first two. 

"What is it, then ?" asked the second, 

"The tree is falling," he replied. 

"As the tree falleth, so shall it lie," said 
Wayne's voice out of the darkness, and it had 
the same sweet and yet horrible air that it had 

288 



The Last Battle 



Diness, I  
ing tc W X 

it lie. X\ 

ms of if 



had throughout, of coming from a great distance, 
nix. ~~fore or after the event. Even when he 
was struggling like an eel or battering like a 
madman, he spoke like a spectator. "As thet 
tree falleth, so shall it lie," he said. "Men have! 
called that a gloomy text. It is the essence! 
of all exultation. I am doing now % wjiat I have 1 
done all my life, what is the only happiness, I 
what is the only universality. I am clinging  
something. Let it fall, and there let 
Fools, you go about and see the kingdoms 
the earth, and are liberal, and wise, and cosmopolitan, which is all that the devil can give you 
 all that he could offer to Christ only to be 
spurned away. I am doing what the truly wise 
do. When a child goes out into the garden and takes hold of a tree, saying, 'Let 
this tree be all I have that moment its roots 
take hold on hell and its branches on the 
stars. The joy I have is what the lover 
knows when a woman is everything. It is 
what a savage knows when his idol is everything. It is what I know when Notting Hill 
is everything. I have a city. Let it stand or 
fall." 

As he spoke, the turf lifted itself like a 
living thing, and out of it rose slowly, like 
crested serpents, the roots of the oak. Then 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

the great head of the tree, that seemed a 
green cloud among grey ones, swept the skysuddenly like a broom, and the whole tree 
heeled over like a ship, smashing every one 
in its fall. 



ago 



Chapter III  Two Voices 

IN a place in which there was total darkness 
for hours, there was also for hours total 
silence. Then a voice spoke out of the 
darkness, no one could have told from where, and 
said aloud  

"So ends the Empire of Notting Hill. As it 
began in blood, so it ended in blood, and all things 
are always the same." 

And there was silence again, and then again 
there was a voice, but it had not the same tone; it 
seemed that it was not the same voice. 

"If all things are always the same, it is 
because they are always heroic. If all things 
are always the same, it is because they are 
always new. To each man one soul only is 
given; to each soul only is given a little power 
 the power at some moments to outgrow and 
swallow up the stars. If age after age that power 
comes upon men, whatever gives it to them is 
great. Whatever makes men feel old is mean 
 an empire or a skin-flint shop. Whatever 
makes men feel young is great  a great war 
or a love story. And in the darkest of the 
books of God there is written a truth that is 
also a riddle. It is of the new things that men 

291 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

tire  of fashions and proposals and improvements and change. It is the old things that 
startle and intoxicate. It is the old things 
that are young. There is no sceptic who does 
not feel that many have doubted before. There 
is no rich and fickle man who does not feel that 
all his novelties are ancient. There is no 
worshipper of change who does not feel upon 
his neck the vast weight of the weariness of 
the universe. But we who do the old things are 
fed by nature with a perpetual infancy. No man 
who is in love thinks that any one has been 
in love before. No woman who has a child 
thinks that there have been such things as 
children. No people that fight for their own city 
are haunted with the burden of the broken empires. Yes, oh dark voice, the world is always 
the same, for it is always unexpected." 

A little gust of wind blew through the night, 
and then the first voice answered  

"But in this world there are some, be they 
wise or foolish, whom nothing intoxicates. 
There are some who see all your disturbances 
like a cloud of flies. They know that while 
men will laugh at your Notting Hill, and will 
study and rehearse and sing of Athens and 
Jerusalem, Athens and Jerusalem were silly 
suburbs like your Notting Hill. They know that 

292 



Two Voices 



the earth itself is a suburb, and can feel only 
drearily and respectably amused as they move 
upon it." 

"They are philosophers or they are fools," 
said the other voice. "They are not men. Men 
live, as I say, rejoicing from age to age in 
something fresher than progress  in the fact 
that with every baby a new sun and a new moon 
are made. If our ancient humanity were a 
single man, it might perhaps be that he would 
break down under the memory of so many 
loyalties, under the burden of so many diverse 
heroisms, under the load and terror of all the 
goodness of men. But it has pleased God so 
to isolate the individual soul that it can only 
learn of all other souls by hearsay, and to each 
one goodness and happiness come with the 
youth and violence of lightning, as momentary 
and as pure. And the doom of failure that lies 
on all human systems does not in real fact affect 
them any more than the worms of the inevitable 
grave affect a children's game in a meadow. Notting Hill has fallen; Notting Hill has died. But 
that is not the tremendous issue. Notting Hill 
has lived." 

"But if," answered the other voice, "if what 
is achieved by all these efforts be only the 
common contentment of humanity, why do 

293 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

men so extravagantly toil and die in them ? Has 
nothing been done by Notting Hill that any 
chance clump of farmers or clan of savages 
would not have done without it? What might 
have been done to Notting Hill if the world 
had been different may be a deep question; 
but there is a deeper. What could have hap- " 
pened to the world if Notting Hill had never 
been?" 

The other voice replied  

"The same that would have happened to the 
world and all the starry systems if an apple-tree 
grew six apples instead of seven; something 
would have been eternally lost. There has 
never been anything in the world absolutely 
like Notting Hill. There will never be anything quite like it to the crack of doom. I 
cannot believe anything but that God loved it 
as He must surely love anything that is itself 
and unreplaceable. But even for that I do not 
care. If God, with all His thunders, hated it, 
I loved it." 

And with the voice a tall, strange figure lifted 
itself out of the debris in the half -darkness. 

The other voice came after a long pause, and 
as it were hoarsely. 

"But suppose the whole matter were really a 
hocus-pocus. Suppose that whatever meaning 

294 



Two Voices 



you may choose in your fancy to give to it, the 
real meaning of the whole was mockery. Suppose it was all folly. Suppose  " 

"I have been in it," answered the voice from 
the tall and strange figure, "and I know it was 
not." 

A smaller figure seemed half to rise in the 
dark. 

"Suppose I am God," said the voice, "and 
suppose I made the world in idleness. Suppose 
the stars, that you think eternal, are only the 
idiot fireworks of an everlasting schoolboy. 
Suppose the sun and the moon, to which you 
sing alternately, are only the two eyes of one 
vast and sneering giant, opened alternately in a 
never-ending wink. Suppose the trees, in my 
eyes, are as foolish as enormous toad-stools. 
Suppose Socrates and Charlemagne are to me 
only beasts, made funnier by walking on their 
hind legs. Suppose I am God, and having made 
things, laugh at them." 

"And suppose I am man," answered the 
other. "And suppose that I give the answer 
that shatters even a laugh. Suppose I do not 
laugh back at you, do not blaspheme you, do 
not curse you. But suppose, standing up 
straight under the sky, with every power of my 
being, I thank you for the fools' paradise you 

295 



The Najyoleon of Notting Hill 

have made. Suppose I praise you, with a literal pain of ecstasy, for the jest that has 
brought me so terrible a joy. If we have taken 
the child's games, and given them the seriousness of a Crusade, if we have drenched your 
grotesque Dutch garden with the blood of 
martyrs, we have turned a nursery into a 
temple. I ask you, in the name of Heaven, who 
wins ?" 

The sky close about the crest of the hills 
and trees was beginning to turn from black 
to grey, with a random suggestion of the 
morning. The slight figure seemed to crawl 
towards the larger one, and the voice was more 
human. 

"But suppose, friend," it said, "suppose that, 
in a bitterer and more real sense, it was all a 
mockery. Suppose that there had been, from 
the beginning of these great wars, one who 
watched them with a sense that is beyond expression, a sense of detachment, of responsibility, 
of irony, of agony. Suppose that there were one 
who knew it vas all a joke.' , 

The tall figure answered  

"He could not know it. For it was not all a 
joke." 

And a gust of wind blew away some clouds that 
sealed the sky-line, and showed a strip of silver 

296 




WAYNE, IT WAS ALL A JOKE 



Two Voices 



behind his great dark legs. Then the other voice 
came, having crept nearer still. 

"Adam Wayne," it said, "there are men 
who confess only in articulo mortis; there are 
people who blame themselves only when they 
can no longer help others. I am one of them. 
Here, upon the field of the bloody end of it 
all, I come to tell you plainly what you would 
never understand before. Do you know who I 
am?" 

"I know you, Auberon Quin," answered the 
tall figure, "and I shall be glad to unburden your 
spirit of anything that lies upon it." 

"Adam Wayne," said the other voice, "of 
what I have to say you cannot in common 
reason be glad to unburden me. Wayne, it 
was all a joke. When I made these cities, I cared 
no more for them than I care for a centaur, 
or a merman, or a fish with legs, or a pig 
with feathers, or any other absurdity. When 
I spoke to you solemnly and encouragingly 
about the flag of your freedom and the peace 
of your city, I was playing a vulgar practical 
joke on an honest gentleman, a vulgar practical joke that has lasted for twenty years. 
Though no one could believe it of me perhaps, 
it is the truth that I am a man both timid and 
tender-hearted. I never dared in the early days 

297 



The Napoleon of Notting Hill 

of your hope, or the central days of your 
supremacy, to tell you this; I never dared to 
break the colossal calm of your face. God 
knows why I should do it now, when my farce 
has ended in tragedy and the ruin of all your 
people! But I say it now. Wayne, it was done 
as a joke." 
blew the sky clearer and clearer, leaving great 

There was silence, and the freshening breeze 
spaces of the white dawn. 

At last Wayne said, very slowly  

"You did it all only as a joke ?" 

"Yes," said Quin. 

"When you conceived the idea," went on 
Wayne, dreamily, "of an army for Bayswater 
and a flag for Notting Hill, there was no gleam, 
no suggestion in your mind that such things 
might be real and passionate?" 

"No," answered Auberon, turning his round, 
white face to the morning with a dull and splendid sincerity ; "I had none at all." 

Wayne sprang down from the height above 
him and held out his hand. 

"I will not stop to thank you," he said, with 
a curious joy in his voice, "for the great 
good for the world you have actually wrought. 
All that I think of that I have said to you a 
moment ago, even when I thought that your 

. 298 



Two Voices 



voice was the voice of a derisive omnipotence, its 
laughter older than the winds of heaven. But_ 
let me say what is immediate and true. You 
and I, Auberon Quin, have both of us 
throughout our lives been again and again called 
mad. And we are mad. We are mad, because we are not two men but one man. We 
are mad, because we are two lobes of the same 
brain, and that brain has been cloven in two. 
And if you ask for the proof of it, it is 
not hard to find. It is not merely that you, 
the humourist, have been in these dark days 
stripped of the joy of gravity. It is not merely 
that I, the fanatic, have had to grope without 
humour. It is that though we seem to be opposite in everything, we have been opposite like 
man and woman, aiming at the same moment at the same practical thing. We are 
the father and the mother of the Charter of I 
the Cities. ,, -J 

Quin looked down at the debris of leaves and 
timber, the relics of the battle and stampede, 
now glistening in the glowing daylight, and 
finally said  

"Yet nothing can alter the antagonism  the 
fact that I laughed at these things and you adored 
them." 

Wayne's wild face flamed with something 
299 



The Napoleon of Nolting Hill 

god-like, as he turned it to be struck by the sunrise. 

"I know of something that will alter that antagonism, something that is outside us, something that you and I have all our lives perhaps taken too little account of. The equal and 
eternal human being will alter that antagonism, 
for the human being sees no real antagonism 
between laughter and respect, the human being, 
the common man, whom mere geniuses like 
you and me can only worship like a god. 
When dark and dreary days come, you and I 
vare necessary, the pure fanatic, the pure satirist. 
We have between us remedied a great wrong. 
We have lifted the modern cities into that poetry 
which every one who knows mankind knows 

ito be immeasurably more common than the 
commonplace. But in healthy people there is 
no war between us. We are but the two lobes 
of the brain of a ploughman. Laughter and love 
are everywhere. The cathedrals, built in the 
ages that loved God, are full of blasphemous grotesques. The mother laughs continually at the 
child, the lover laughs continually at the lover, 
the wife at the husband, the friend at the 
friend. Auberon Quin, we have been too long 
separated; let us go out together. You have 
I a halberd and I a sword, let us start our 

300 

Two Voices 

wanderings over the world. For we are its two 
essentials. Come, it is already day." 

In the blank white light Auberon hesitated a 
moment. Then he made the formal salute with 
his halberd, and they went away together into 
the unknown world. 


The End. 

BOOK I 



THE VACANT WORLD 




DARKNESS AND DAWN 



CHAPTER I 

THE AWA] 



/AKU[< 



Dimly, like the daybreak gliSBRr of a sky long wrapped 
in fogs, a sign of consciousness began to daRti in the face 
of the tranced girl. 

Once more the breath of life began to stir in that full 
bosom, to which again a vital warmth had on this day of 
days crept slowly back. 

And as she lay there, prone upon the dusty floor, her 
beautiful face buried and shielded in the hollow of her arm, 
a sigh welled from her lips. 

Life  lif e was flowing back again ! The miracle of miracles was growing to reality. 

Faintly now she breathed ; vaguely her heart began to throb 
once more. She stirred. She moaned, still for the moment 
powerless to cast off wholly the enshrouding incubus of that 
tremendous, dreamless sleep. 

Then her hands closed. The finely tapered fingers tangled themselves in the masses of thick, luxuriant hair which 
lay outspread all over and about her. The eyelids trembled. 

And, a moment later, Beatrice Kendrick was sitting up, 
dazed and utterly uncomprehending, peering about her at 
the strangest vision which since the world bn had ever 
been the lot of anv human creature to behold  the vision of 
a place transformed beyond all power of the intellect to understand 

For of the room which she remembered, which had been 



I 




4 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

her last sight when (so long, so very long, ago) her eyes 
had closed with that sudden and unconquerable drowsiness, 
of that room, I say, remained only walls, ceiling, floor of 
rust-red steel and crumbling cement 

Quite gone was all the plaster, as by magic. Here or 
there a heap of whitish dust betrayed where some of its 
detritus still lay. 

Gone was every picture, chart, and map -which  but an 
hour since, it seemed to her  had decked this office of Allan 
Stern, consulting engineer, this aerie up in the forty-eighth 
story of the Metropolitan Tower. 

Furniture, there now was none. Over the still-intact glass 
of the windows cobwebs were draped so thickly as almost to 
exclude the light of day  2l strange, fly-infested curtain 
where once neat green shade-rollers had hung. 

Even as the bewildered girl sat there, lips parted, eyes 
wide with amaze, a spider seized his buzzing prey and scampered back into a hole in the wall. 

A huge, leathery bat, suspended upside down in the far 
corner, cheeped with dry, crepitant sounds of irritation. 

Beatrice rubbed her eyes. 

"What?" she said, quite slowly. "Dreaming? How 
singular ! I only wish I could remember this when I wake 
up. Of all the dreams I've ever had, this one's certainly the 
strangest. So real, so vivid I Why, I could swear I was 
awake  and yet  " 

All at once a sudden doubt flashed into her mind. An 
uneasy expression dawned across her face. Her eyes grew 
wild with a great fear ; the fear of utter and absolute incomprehension. 

Something about this room, this weird awakening, bore in 
upon her consciousness the dread tidings this was not a 
dream! 

Something drove home to her the fact that it was real, 
objective, positive ! And with a gasp of fright she struggled 
up amid the litter and the rubbish of that uncanny room. 

" Oh ! " she cried in terror, as a huge scorpion, malevolent, 




THE AWAKENING 5 

and with its tail raised to strike, scuttled away and vanished 
through a gaping void where once the corridor-door had 
swung.  Oh, oh I Where am I? What  tuU has  happenedf" 

Horrified beyond all words, pale and staring, both hands 
clutched to her breast, whereon her very clothing now had 
torn and crumbled, she faced about. 

To her it seemed as though s(ne monstrous, evil thing 
were lurking in the dim comer at her back. She tried to 
scream, but could utter no sound, save a choked gasp. 

Then she started toward the doorway. Even as she took 
the first few steps her gown  a mere tattered mockery of 
raiment  fell away f rcnn her. 

And, confronted by a new problem, she stopped short. 
About her she peered in vain for something to protect her 
disarray. There was nothing I 

" Why  Where's  where's my chair ? My desk ? " she exclaimed thickly, starting toward the place by the window 
where they should have been, and were not. Her shapely 
feet fell soundlessly in that strange and impalpable dust 
which thickly coated everything. 

" My typewriter? Is  can that be my typewriter? Great 
Heavens I What's the matter here, with everything? Am 
I mad?'' 

There before her lay a somewhat larger pile of dust mixed 
with soft and punky splinters of rotten wood. Amid all this 
decay she saw some bits of rust, a corroded type-bar or two, 
even a few rubber key-caps, still recognizable, though with 
the letters quite obliterated. 

All about her, veiling her completely in a mantle of wondrous gloss and beauty, her lustrous hair fell, as she stooped 
to see this strange, incomprehensible phenomenon. She 
tried to pick up one of the rubber caps. At her merest 
touch it crumbled to an impalpable white powder. 

Back with a shuddering cry the girl sprang, terrified. 

'Merciful Heavens!" she supplicated. 'What  what 
does all this mean ? " 




6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

For a moment she stood there, her every power of thought, 
of motion, numbed. Breathing not, she only stared in a 
iwild kind of cringing amazement, as perhaps you might do 
if you should see a dead man move. 

Then to the door she ran. Out into the hall she peered, 
this way and that, down the dismantled corridor, up the 
wreckage of the stairs all cumbered, like the office itself, with 
dust and webs and vermin. 

Aloud she hailed: "Oh! Help, help, help!' No answer. Even the echoes flung back only dull, vacuous sounds 
that deepened her sense of awful and incredible isolation. 

What? No noise of human life anywhere to be heard? 
'\ None ! No familiar hum of the metropolis now rose from 
what, when she had fallen asleep, had been swarming streets 
and miles on miles of habitations. 

Instead, a blank, unbroken leaden silence, that seemed 
part of the musty, choking atmosphere  a silence that 
weighed down on Beatrice like funeral-palls. 

Dumfounded by all this, and by the universal crumbling 
of every perishable thing, the girl ran, shuddering, back into 
the office. There in the dust her foot struck something 
hard. 

She stooped ; she caught it up and stared at it 

" My glass ink-well ! What ? Only such things remain ?  

No dream, then, but reality! She knew at length that 
. some catastrophe, incredibly vast, some disaster cosmic in 
the tragedy of its sweep, had desolated the world. 

"Oh, my mother!" cried she. "My mother  deadf 
Dead, now, how long?" 

She did not weep, but just stood cowering, a chill of 
anguished horror racking her. All at once her teeth began 
to chatter, her body to shake as with an ague. 

Thus for a moment dazed and stunned she remained there, 
knowing not which way to turn nor what to do. Then her 
terror-stricken gaze fdl on the doorway leading from her 
outer office to the inner one, the one where Stem had had 
his laboratory and his consultation-room. 




THE AWAKENING 7 

This door now hung, a few worm-eaten planks and splintered bits of wood, barely supported by the rusty hinges. 

Toward it she staggered. About her she drew the sheltering masses of her hair, like a Godiva of another age ; and 
to her eyes, womanlike, the hot tears mounted. As she 
went, she cried in a voice of horror. 

" Mr. Stem! Oh  Mr. Stem! Are  are you dead, too? 
You can't be it's too frightful ! ' / 

She reached the door. The mere touch of her out-f 
stretched hand disintegrated it Down in a cnunbling mass 
it felL Thick dust bellied up in a cloud, through which a 
siile sun-ray that entered the cobwebbed pane shot a radiant arrow. 

Pccrii, hesitant, fearful of even greater terrors in that 
other room, Beatrice peered through this dust-haze. A sick 
fordxxling of evil possessed her at thought of what she 
might find there  yet more afraid was she of what she 
knew lay behind her. 

An instant she stood within the mined doorway, her left 
hand resting on the moldy jam. Then, with a cry, she 
started forward  a cry in which terror had given place to 
joy, despair to hope. 

Forgotten now the fact that, save for the shrouding of her 
massy hair, she stood naked. Forgotten the wreck, the 
desolation everywhere. 

 Oh  thank Heaven ! " gasped she. 

There, in that inner office, half-rising from the wrack of 
many things that had been and were now no more, her 
startled eyes beheld the figure of a man of Allan Stem ! 

He lived! 

At her he peered with eyes that saw not, yet ; toward her 
be groped a vague, unsteady hand. 

He lived I 

Not quite alone in this world-min, not all alone was 
die! 



.% 




CHAPTER II 

REALIZATION 

The joy in Beatrice's eyes gave way to poignant wonder as 
she gazed on him. Could this be het 

Yes, well she knew it was. She recognized him even 
through the grotesquery of his clinging rags, even behind 
the mask of a long, red, dusty beard and formidable mustache, even despite the wild and staring incoherence of his 
whole expression. 

Yet how incredible the metamorphosis! To her flashed 
a memory of this man, her other-time employer  keen and 
smooth-shaven, alert, well-dressed, self-centered, dominant, 
the master of a hundred complex problems, the directing 
mind of engineering works innumerable. 

Faltering and uncertain now he stood there. Then, at 
the sound of the girl's voice, he staggered toward her with 
outflung hands. He stopped, and for a moment stared at 
her. 

For he had had no time as yet to correlate his thoughts, to 
pull himself together. 

And while one's heart might throb ten times, Beatrice saw 
terror in his blinking, bloodshot eyes. 

But almost at once the engineer mastered himself. Even 
as Beatrice watched him, breathlessly, from the door, she 
saw his fear die out, she saw his courage well up fresh and 
strong. 

It was almost as though something tangible were limning 
the man's soul upon his face. She thrilled at sight of him. 

And though for a long moment no word was spoken, 

8 




REALIZATION 9 

while the man and woman stood looking at each other like 
two children in some dread and unfamiliar attic, an understandii leaped between them. 

Then, womanlike, instinctively as she breathed, the girl 
ran to him. Forgetful of every convention and of her disarray, she seized his hand. And in a voice that trembled till 
it brcce she cned  

"What is it? What does all this mean? Tell me!" 

To him she clung. 

" Tdl me the truth  and save me ! Is it real? " 

Stem looked at her wonderingly. He smiled a strange, 
wan, mirthless smile. 

All about him he looked. Then his lips moved, but for 
the moment no sound came. 

He made another effort, this time successful. 

 There, there," said he huskily, as though the dust and 
dryness of the innumerable years had got into his very voice. 
" There, now, don't be afraid ! 

' Something seems to have taken place here while  we've 
been asleep. What? What is it? I don't know yet. I'll 
find out. There's nothing to be alarmed about, at any rate." 

"But  look!" She pointed at the hideous desolation. 

" Yes, I see. But no matter. You're alive. I'm alive. 
That's two of us, anyhow. Maybe there are a lot more. 
Well soon see. Whatever it may be, we'll win." 

He turned and, trailing rags and streamers of rotten cloth 
that once had been a business suit, he waded through the 
confusion of wreckage on the floor to the window. 

If you have seen a weather-beaten scarecrow flapping in 
the wind, you have some notion of his outward guise. No 
tramp you ever laid eyes on could have offered so preposterous an appearance. 

Down over his shoulders fell the matted, dusty hair. His 
tangled beard reached far below his waist. Even his eyebrows, naturally rather light, had grown to a heavy thatch 
above his eyes. 

Save that he was not gray or bent, and that he still seemed 



I 




10 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

to have kept the resilient force of vigorous manhood, you 
might have thought him some incredibly ancient Rip Van 
Winkle come to life upon that singular stage, there in the 
tower. 

But little time gave he to introspection or the matter of 
his own appearance. With one quick gesture he swept away' 
the shrouding tangle of webs, spiders, and dead flies that 
obscured the window. Out he peered.  

" Good Heavens ! " cried he, and started back a pace. 

She ran to him. 

" What is it ? " she breathlessly exclaimed. 

"Why, I don't know  yet. But this is something big! 
Something universal! It's  it's  no, no, you'd better not 
look out  not just yet." 

" I must know everything. Let me see ! " 

Now she was at his side, and, like him, staring out into 
the clear sunshine, out over the vast expanses of the city. 

A moment's utter silence fell. Quite clearly hummed the 
protest of an imprisoned fly in a web at the top of the window. The breathing of the man and woman sounded quick 
and loud. 

" All wrecked? " cried Beatrice. " But then " 

" Wrecked ? It looks that way," the engineer made answer, with a strong effort holding his emotions in control. 
" Why not be frank about this ? You'd better make up your 
mind at once to accept the very worst. I see no signs of 
anything else." 

" The worst? You mean  " 

" I mean just what we see out there. You can interpret 
it as well as I." 

Again the silence while they looked, with emotions that 
could find no voicing in words. Instinctively the engineer 
passed an arm about the frightened girl and drew her close 
to him. 

" And the last thing I remember," whispered she, " was 
just  just after you'd finished dictating those Taunton 
Bridge specifications. I suddenly felt  oh, so sleepy ! Only 







REALIZATION ii 

for a minute I thought I'd close my eyes and rest, and then 
then" 

"Thisf" 

She nodded. 

" Same here," said he. " What the deuce can have struck 
ns ? Us and everybody  and everything ? Talk about your 
problems ! Lucky I'm sane and sound, and  and  " 

He did not finish, but fell once more to studying the incomprehensible prospect. 

Their view was towards the east, but over the river and J 
the reaches of what had once upon a time been Long Island 
Gty and Brooklyn, as familiar a scene in the other days 
as could be possibly imagined. But now how altered an 
aq)ect greeted them ! 

" It's surely all wiped out, all gone, gone into ruins," said 
Stem slowly and carefully, weighing each word. " No hallucination about that.' He swept the sky-line with his eyes, 
that now peered keenly out from beneath those bushy brows. 
Instinctively he brought his hand up to his breast. He 
started with surprise. 

" What's this? " he cried. " Why, I I've got a full yard 
of whiskers. My good Lord I Whiskers on mef And I 
used to say  " 

He burst out laughing. At his beard he plucked with 
merriment that jangled horribly on the girl's tense nerves. 
Suddenly he grew serious. For the first time he seemed to 
take clear notice of his companion's plight. 

" Why, what a time it must have been ! " cried he. " Here's 
some calculation all cut out for me, all right. But  you 
can't go that way, Miss Kendrick. It  it won't do, you 
know. Got to have something to put on. Great Heavens, 
what a situation ! " 

He tried to peel off his remnant of a coat, but at the 
merest touch it tore to shreds and fell away. The girl restrained him. 

" Never mind," said she, with quiet, modest dignity. " My 
hair protects me very well for the present. If you and I 




12 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

are all that's left of the people in the world, this is no time 
for trifles." 

A moment he studied her. Then he nodded, and grew 
very grave. 

y Forgive me," he whispered, laying a hand on her shoulder. Once more he turned to the window and looked out. 

" So then, it's all gone? " he queried, speaking as to himself. " Only a skyscraper standing here or there ? And the 
bridges and the islands  all changed. 

" Not a sign of life anywhere ; not a sound ; the forests 
growing thick among the ruins? A dead world if  if all 
the world is like this part of it I All dead, save you and 
me!" 

In silence they stood there, striving to realize the full import of the catastrophe. And Stern, deep down in his heart, 
caught some glimmering insight of the future and was glad. 




CHAPTER III 

ON THE TOWER PLATFORM 

Suddenly the girl started, rebelling against the evidence of 
her own senses, striving again to force upon herself the 
belief that, after all, it could not be so. 

" No, no, no 1 " she cried. " This can't be true. It mustn't 
be. There's a mistake somewhere. This simply must be all 
an illusion, a dream ! 

"If the whole world's dead, how does it happen we're 
alive? How do we know it's dead? Can we see it all from 
here? Why, all we see is just a little segment of things. 
Perhaps if we could know the truth, look farther, and 
know  " 

He shook his head. 

" I guess you'll find it's real enough," he answered, " no 
matter how far you look. But, just the same, it won't do 
any harm to extend our radius of observation. 

" Come, let's go on up to the top of the tower, up to the 
observation-platform. The quicker we know all the available facts the better. Now, if I only had a telescope  ! " 

He thought hard a moment, then turned and strode 
over to a heap of friable disintegration that lay where once 
his instrument case had stood, containing his surveying tools. 

Down on his ragged knees he fell; his rotten shreds of 
clothing tore and ripped at every movement, like so much 
water-soaked paper. 

A strange, hairy, dust-covered figure, he knelt there. 
Quickly he plunged his hands into the rubbish and began 
pftwing it over and over with eager haste. 

13 




14 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" Ah ! " he cried with triumph. " Thank Heaven, brass 
and lenses haven't crumbled yet ! " 

Up he stood again. In his hand the girl saw a peculiar 
telescope. 

" My  level/ see?" he exclaimed, holding it up to view. 
" The wooden tripod's long since gone. The fixtures that 
held it on won't bother me much.  

' Neither will the spirit-glass on top. The main thing 
is that the telescope itself seems to be still intact. Now 
we'll see." 

Speaking, he dusted off the eye-piece and the objective 
with a bit of rag from his coat-sleeve. 

Beatrice noted that the brass tubes were all eaten and 
pitted with verdigris, but they still held firmly. And the 
lenses, when Stem had finished cleaning them, showed as 
bright and clear as ever. 

" Come, now ; come with me," he bade. 

Out through the doorway into the hall he made his way 
while the girl followed. As she went she gathered her 
wondrous veil of hair more closely about her. 

In this universal disorganization, this wreck of all the 
world, how little the conventions counted ! 

Together, picking their way up the broken stairs, where 
now the rust-bitten steel showed through the corroded stone 
and cement in a thousand places, they cautiously climbed. 

Here, spider-webs thickly shrouded the way, and had to 
be brushed down. There, still more bats hung and chippered in protest as the intruders passed. 

A fluffy little white owl blinked at them from a dark niche ; 
and, well toward the top of the climb, they flushed up a 
score of mud-swallows which had ensconced themselves 
comfortably along a broken balustrade. 

At last, however, despite all unforeseen incidents of this 
sort, they reached the upper platform, nearly a thousand 
feet above the earth. 

Out through the relics of the revolving door they crept, 
he leading, testing each foot of the way before the girl. 




ON THE TOWER PLATFORM 15 

They reached the narrow platform of red tUing that surrounded the tower. 

Even here they saw with growing amazement that the 
hand of time and of this maddening mystery had laid its 
heavy imprint 

"' Look I " he exclaimed, pointing. " What this all means 
we don't know yet How long it's been we can't tell. But 
to judge by the appearance up here, it's even longer than I 
thought See, the very tiles are cracked and crumbling. 

" Tilework is usually considered highly recalcitrant  but 
this is gone. There's grass growing in the dust that's settled 
between the tiles. And  why, here's a young oak that's 
taken root and forced a dozen slabs out of place." 

"The winds and birds have carried seeds up here, and 
aooms,'' she answered in an awed voice. "Think of the 
time that must have passed. Years and years. 

" But tell me," and her brow wrinkled with a sudden 
wonder, " tell me how we've ever lived so long? / can't 
understand it. 

" Not only have we escaped starvation, but we haven't 
frozen to death in all these bitter winters. How can that 
have happened?" 

''Let it all go as suspended animation till we learn the 
facts, if we ever do," he replied, glancing about with wonder. 

" You know, of course, how toads have been known to 
live embedded in rock for centuries? How fish, hardfrozen, have been brought to life again? Well  " 

" But we are human beings." 

" I know. Certain unknown natural forces, however, 
might have made no more of us than of non-mammalian 
and less highly organized creatures. 

" Don't bother your head about these problems yet a 
while. On my word, we've got enough to do for the present without much caring about how or why. 

" All we definitely know is that some very long, undetermiiied period of time has passed, leaving us still alive. The 
rent can watt" 




i6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

"How long a time do you judge it?" she anxiously 
inquired. 

" Impossible to say at once. But it must have been something extraordinary  probably far longer than either of 
us suspect. 

" See, for example, the attrition of everything up here 
exposed to the weather." He pointed at the heavy stone 
railing. " See how that is wrecked, for instance." 

A whole segment, indeed, had fallen inward. Its debris 
lay in confusion, blocking all the southern side of the platform. 

The bronze bars, which Stern well remembered  two at 
each comer, slanting downward and bracing a rail  had 
now wasted to mere pockmarked shells of metal. 

Three had broken entirely and sagged wantonly awry 
with the displacement of the stone blocks, between which 
the vines and grasses had long been carrying on their destructive work. 

"Look out!" Stem cautioned. "Don't lean against 
any of those stones." Firmly he held her back as she, 
eagerly inquisitive, started to advance toward the railing. 

" Don't go anywhere near the edge. It may all be rotten and undermined, for anything we know. Keep back 
here, close to the wall." 

Sharply he inspected it a moment. 

" Facing stones are pretty well gone," said he, " but, so 
far so I can see, the steel frame isn't too bad. Putting 
everything together, I'll probably be able before long to 
make some sort of calculation of the date. But for now 
we'll have to call it ' X,' and let it go at that." 

' The year X ! " she whispered under her breath. " Good 
Heavens, am I as old as that ? " 

He made no answer, but only drew her to him protectingly, while all about them the warm summer wind swept 
onward to the sea, out over the sparkling expanses of the 
bay  alone unchanged in all that universal wreckage. 
, In the breeze her heavy masses of hair stirred luriiy. 




ON THE TOWER PLATFORM 17 

He fdt its silken caress on his half-naked shoulder, and in 
his ears the blood began to pound with strange insistence. 

Quite gone now the daze and drowsiness of the first 
wakening. Stem did not even feel weak or shaken. On 
the contrary, never had life bounded more warmly, more 
fully, in his veins. 

The presence of the girl set his heart throbbing heavily, 
but he bit his lip and restrained every untoward thought. 

Only his arm tightened a little about that warmly clingiog body. Beatrice did not shrink from him. She needed 
his protection as never since the world began had woman 
needed man. 

To her it seemed that come what might, his strength and 
comfort could not fail. And, despite everything, she could 
not  for the moment  find unhappiness within her heart. 

Quite vanished now, even in those brief minutes since 
their awakening, was all consciousness of their former relationshipemployer and employed. 

The self-contained, courteous, yet unapproachable engineer had disappeared. 

Now, through all the extraneous disguise of his outer 
self, there lived and breathed just a man, a young man, 
thewed with the vigor of his plentitude. All else had been 
swept clean away by this great change. 

The girl was different, too. Was this strong woman, 
eager-eyed and brave, the quiet, low-voiced stenographer he 
remembered, busy only with her machine, her file-boxes, and 
her carbon-copies? Stem dared not realize the transmutation. He ventured hardly fringe it in his thoughts. 

To divert his wonderings and to case a situation which 
oppressed him, he b;an adjusting the " level " telescope to 
his eye. 

With his back planted firmly against the tower, he studied 
a wick section of the dead and buried world so very far 
betow thenL Widi astonishment he cried : 

 It ir true, Beatrice I Everything's swept clean away. 
iJcduag toft, nothing at all  no signs of life I 







i8 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" As far as I can reach with these lenses, universal ruin. 
We're all alone in this whole world, just you and I  and 
everything belongs to us ! 

"Everything  all ours? 

" Everything 1 Even the future  the future of the human race ! " 

Suddenly he felt her tremble at his side. Down at her 
he looked, a great new tenderness possessing him. He saw 
that tears were forming in her eyes. 

Beatrice pressed both hands to her face and bowed 
her head. Filled with strange emotions, the man watched 
her for a moment. 

Then in silence, realizing the uselessness of any words, 
knowing that in this monstrous Ragnarok of all humanity 
no ordinary relations of life could bear either cogency or 
meaning, he took her in his arms. 

And there alone with her, far above the mined world, 
high in the pure air of mid-heaven, he comforted the girl 
with words till then unthought-of and unknown to him. 




CHAPTER IV 

THE aXY OF DEATH 

Presently Beatrice grew calmer. For though grief and 
terror still weighed upon her soul, she realized that this was 
no fit time to yield to any weakness  now when a thousand 
things were pressing for accomplishment, if their own 
lives, too, were not presently to be snuffed out in all this 
universal death. 

"Come, come," said Stem reassuringly. "I want you, 
too, to get a complete idea of what has happened. From 
now on you must know all, share all, with me." And, taking her by the hand he led her along the crumbling and uncertain platform. 

Together, very cautiously, they explored the three sides 
of the platform still unchoked by ruins. 

Out over the incredible mausoleum of civilization they 
peered. Now and again they fortified their vision by recourse to the telescope. 

Nowhere, as he had said, was any slightest sign of life 
to be discerned. Nowhere a thread of smoke arose; nowhere a sound echoed upward. 

Dead lay the city, between its rivers, whereon now no jj. 
sail glinted in the sunlight, no tug puffed vehemently with " 
plumy jets of steam, no liner idled at anchor or noised its 
slow course out to sea. 

The Jersey shore, the Palisades, the Bronx and Long 
Island all lay buried in dense forests of conifers and oak,  
with only here and there some skeleton mockery of a steel 
structure jutting through. 

19 





DARKNESS AND DAWN 

The islands in the harbor, too, were thickly overgrown. 

On Ellis, no sign of the immigrant station remained. Castle 

jp William was quite gone. And with a gasp of dismay and 

pain, Beatrice pointed out the fact that no l<Miger Liberty 

held her bronze torch aloft. 

. Save for a black, misshapen mass protruding through the 

 tree-tops, the huge gift of France was no more. 

Fringing the water-front, all the way round, the mournful 
Y remains of the docks and piers lay in a mere sodden jumble of decay, with an occasional hulk sunk alongside. 

Even over these wrecks of liners, vegetation was growing 
 rank and green. All the wooden ships, barges and schooners had utterly vanished. 

The telescope showed only a stray, lolling mast of steel, 

)x here or yonder, thrusting up from the desolation, like a 

mute appealing hand raised to a Heaven that responded not. 

" See," remarked Stern, " up-town almost all the build ings seem to have crumbled in upon themselves, or to have 
fallen outward into the streets. What an inconceivable 
tangle of detritus those streets must be 1 

" And, do you notice the park hardly shows at all ? Everything's so overgrown with trees you can't tell where it 
begins or ends. Nature has her revenge at last, on man ! " 

" The universal claim, made real," said Beatrice. " Those 
rather clearer lines of green, I suppose, must be the larger 
streets. See how the avenues stretch' away and away, like 
ribbons of green velvet I 

" Everywhere that roots can hold at all, Mother Nature 
has set up her flags again. Hark! What's that?" 

A moment they listened intently. Up to them, from 
very far, rose a wailing cry, tremulous, long-drawn, formidable. 

"Oh! Then there are people, after all?" faltered the 
girl, grasping Stem's arm. 

He laughed. 

" No, hardly ! " answered he. " I see you don't know 
the wolf-cry. I didn't till I heard it in the Hudson Bay 




THE CITY OF DEATH 21 

country, last winter  that is, last winter, plus X. Not very 
pleasant, is it? 

" Wolves ! Then there are" 

"Why not? Probably all sorts of game on the island 
now. Why, shouldn't there be? All in Mother Nature's 
stock-in-trade, you know. 

 But come, come, don't let that worry you. We're safe, 
for the present. Time enough to consider hunting later. 
Let's creep around here to the other side of the tower, and 
see what we can see." 

Silently she acquiesced. Together they reached the southem part of the platform, making their way as far as the 
jumbled rocks of the fallen railing would permit. 

Very carefully they progressed, fearful every moment lest 
die support break beneath them and hurl them down along 
the sloping side of the pinnacle to death. 

" Look I " bade Stem, pointing. " That very long green 
line there used to be Broadway. Quite a respectable Forest 
cf Arden now, isn't it ? " He swept his hand far outward. 

 See those steel cages, those tiny, far-off ones with dayBgfat shining through ? You know them  the Park Row, the 
Singer, the Woolworth and all the rest. And the bridges, 
locric at those ! " 

She shivered at the desolate sight. Of the Brooklyn 
Bridge only the towers were visible. 

The watchers, two isolated castaways on their island in 
the sea of uttermost desolation, beheld a dragging mass of 
wreckage that drooped from these towers on either shore, 
down to the sparkling flood. 

The other bridges, newer and stronger far, still remained 
standing. But even from that distance Stem could quite 
plainly see, without the telescope, that the Williamsburg 
Bridge had " buckled " downward and that the farther span 
of the Blackwell's Island Bridge was in ruinous disrepair. 

 How horrible, how ghastly is all this waste and ruin ! " 
tboct the engineer. " Yet, even in their overthrow, how 
wonderful are the works of man ! " 



A



22 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

A vast wonder seized him as he stood there gazing; a 
fierce desire to rehabilitate all this wreckage, to set it right, 
to start the wheels of the world-machinery running once 
more. 

At the tliought of his own powerlessness a bitter smile 
curled his lips. 

Beatrice seemed to share something of his wonder. 

" Can it be possible," whispered she,  that you and  and 
I  are really like Macaulay's lone watcher of the worldwreck on London Bridge? " 

" That we are actually seeing the thing so often dreamed 
of by prophets and poets ? That  All this mighty heart is 
lying still,' at last  forever ? The heart of the world, never 
to beat again ? " 

He made no answer, save to shake his head ; but fast his 
thoughts were running. 

So then, could he and Beatrice, just they two, be in stem 
reality the sole survivors of the entire human race? That 
race for whose material welfare he had, once on a time, 
done such tremendous work? 

Could they be destined, he and she, to witness the closing 
chapter in the long, painful, glorious Book of Evolution? 
Slightly he shivered and glanced round. 

Till he could adjust his reason to the facts, could learn 
the truth and weigh it, he knew he must not analyze too 
closely ; he felt he must try not to think. For thai way lay 
madness ! 

Far out she gazed. 

The sun, declining, shot a broad glory all across the sky. 
Purple and gold and crimson lay the light-bands over the 
breast of the Hudson. 

Dark blue the shadows streamed across the ruined city 

. with its crowding forests, its blank-staring windows and 

A sagging walls, its thousands of gaping vacancies, where wood 

and stone and brick had crumbled down  the city where 

once the tides of human life had ebbed and flowed, roaring 

resistlessly. 




THE CITY OF DEATH 23 

High overhead drifted a few rosy clouds, part of that 
changeless nature which alone did not repel or mystify these 
two beleaguered waifs, these chance survivors, this man, this 
woman, left alone together by the hand of fate. 

They were dazed, fascinated by the splendor of that sunset over a world devoid of human life, for the moment giving 
np all efforts to judge or understand. 

Stem and his mate peered closer, down at the interwoven 
jungles of Union Square, the leafy frond-masses that .j 
marked the one-time course of Twenty-Third Street, the  
forest in Madison Square, and the truncated column of the 
tower where no longer Diana turned her huntress bow to 
every varying breeze. 

They heard their own hearts beat. The intake of their 
breath sounded strangely loud. Above them, on a broken 
cornice, some resting swallows twittered. 

All at once the girl spoke. 

Sec the Flatiron Building over there!" said she. A What a hideous wreck ! " 

From Stem she took the telescope, adjusted it, and gazed 
minutely at the shattered pile of stone and metal. 

Blotched as with leprosy stood the walls, whence many 
hundreds of blocks had fallen into Broadway forming a '" 
vast moraine that for some distance choked that thorough


In numberless places the steel frame peered through. 
The whole roof had caved in, cmshing down the upper 
stories, of which only a few sparse upstanding metal besmis 
remained. 

The girl's gaze was directed at a certain spot which she 
knew well 

"Oh, I can even see  into some of the offices on- the 
eteenth floor!" cried she.  There, look?" And she 
pointed. " That one near the front I I-I used to know  " 

She broke short off. In her trembling hands the telescope sank. Stem saw that she was very pale. 

"Take me down!" she whispered. "I can't stand it 



I . 



t 




24 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

any longer  I can't, possibly I The sight of that wrecked 
office 1 Let's go down where I can't see that!" 

Gently, as though she had been a frightened child. Stern 
ftd her round the platform to the doorway, then down the 
crumbling stairs and so to the wreckage and dust-strewn 
confusion of what had been his office. 

And there, his hand upon her shoulder, he bade her still 
be of good courage. 

"Listen now, Beatrice," said he. "Let's try to reason 
this thing out together, let's try to solve this problem like 
two intelligent human beings. 

" Just what's happened, we don't know ; we can't know 
yet a while, till I investigate. We don't even know what 
year this is. 

" Don't know whether anybody else is still alive, anywhere in the world. But we can find out  after we've 
made provision for the immediate present and formed some 
rational plan of life. 

" If all the rest are gone, swept away, wiped out clean 
like figures on a slate, then why we should have happened 
to survive whatever it was that struck the earth, is still 
a riddle far beyond our comprehension. 

He raised her face to his, noble despite all its grotesque 
disfigurements; he looked into her eyes as though to read 
the very soul of her, to judge whether she could share this 
fight, could brave this coming struggle. 

"All these things may yet be answered. Once I get 
the proper data for this series of phenomena, I can find 
the solution, never fear! 

" Some vast world-duty may be ours, far greater, infinitely more vital than anything that cither of us has ever 
dreamed. It's not our place, now, to mourn or fear ! Rather 
it is to read this mystery, to meet it and to conquer 1 " 

Through her tears the girl smiled up at him, trustingly, 
confidingly. And in the last declining rays of tfie sun that 
glinted through the wiadowane, her eyes were very beautiful. 




 

 



CHAPTER V 

EXPLORATION 

Came now the evening, as they sat and talked together, 
talked long and earnestly, there within that ruined place. 
Too eager for some knowledge of the truth, they, to feel 
hunger or to think of their kck of clothing. 

Chairs they had none, nor even so much as a broom to 
dean the floor with. But Stern, iirst-off, had wrenched a 
marble slab from the stairway. 

And with this plank of stone still strong enough to serve, 
he had scraped all one comer of the office floor free of 
rubbish. This gave them a preliminary camping-place 
wherein to take their bearings and discuss what must be 
done. 

" So then," the engineer was saying as the dusk grew 
deq)er, " so then, we'll apparently have to make this building our headquarters for a while. 

' As nearly as I can figure, this is about what must have 
happened. Some sudden, deadly, numbing plague or cataclysm must have struck the earth, long, long ago. 

" It may have been an almost instantaneous onset of 
some new and highly fatal micro-organism, propagating 
with such marvelous rapidity that it swept the world clean 
in a day  doing its work before any resistance could be 
organized or thought of. 

" Again, some poisonous gas may have developed, either 
from a fissure in the earth's crust, or otherwise. Other hypotheses are possible, but of what practical value are they 
now? 

25 




26 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

"We only know that here, in this uppermost office of 
the Tower, you and I have somehow escaped with only a 
long period of completely suspended animation. How long? 
God alone knows! That's a query I can't even guess the 
answer to as yet." 

" Well, to judge by all the changes," Beatrice suggested 
thoughtfully, " it can't have been less than a hundred years. 
Great Heavens ! " and she burst into a little satiric laugh. 
"Am / a hundred and twenty-four years old? Think of 
that ! " 

"You underestimate," Stem answered. " But no matter 
about the time question for the present; we can't solve it 
now. 

" Neither can we solve the other problem about Europe 
and Asia and all the rest of the world. Whether London, 
Paris, Berlin, Rome, and every other city, every other land, 
all have shared this fate, we simply don't know. 

" All we can have is a feeling of strong probability that 
life, human life I mean, is everywhere extinct  save right 
here in this room! 

" Otherwise, don't you see, men would have made their 
way back here again, back to New York, where all these 
incalculable treasures seem to have perished, and  ' 

He broke short off. Again, far off, they heard a faint 
reechoing roar. For a moment they both sat speechless. 
What could it be? Some distant wall toppling down? A 
hungry beast scenting its prey? They could not tell. But 
Stem smiled. 

" I guess," said he, " guns will be about the first thing 
I'll look for, after food. There ought to be good hunting 
down in the jungles of Fifth Avenue and Broadway! 

" You shoot, of 'course? No? Well, I'll soon teach you. 
Lots of things both of us have got to leam now. No end 
of them ! " 

He rose from his place on the floor, went over to the 
window and stood for a minute peering out into the gloom. 
Then suddenly he tumed. 




EXPLORATION 27 

''What's the matter with me, anyhow?" he exclaimed 
with irritation. "What right have I to be staying here, 
theorizing, when there's work to do? I ought to be busy 
this very minute ! 

" In some way or other I've got to find food, clothing, 
UxASf arms  a thousand things. And above all, water! 
And here I've been speculating about the past, fool that 
laml' 

Yoa  you aren't going to leave me  not to-night?" 
faltered the girl. 

Stem seemed not to have heard her, so strong the imperative of action lay upon him now. He began to pace the 
floor, sliding and stumbling through the rubbish, a singular 
figure in his tatters and with his patriarchal hair and beard, 
a figure dimly seen by the faint light that still gloomed 
through the window. 

' In all that wreckage down below, " said he, as though 
half to himself, " in all that vast congeries of ruin which 
once was called New York, surely enough must still remain 
intact for our small needs. Enough till we can reach the 
land, the country, and raise food of our own 1 " 

" Don't go now! " pleaded Beatrice. She, too, stood up, 
and out she stretched her hands to him. " Don't, please ! 
Wc can get along scxne way or other till morning. At 
least, / can!" 

" No, no, it isn't right ! Down in the shops and stores, 
who knows but we might find  " 

" But you're unarmed ! And in the streets  in the forest, rather  " 

" Listen ! " he commanded rather abruptly. " This is no 
time for hesitating or for weakness. I know you'll stand 
your share of all that we must suffer, dare and do together. 

" Some way or other I've got to make you comfortable. 
I've got to locate food and drink immediately. Got to get 
my bearings. Why, do you think I'm going to let you, 
even for one night, go fasting and thirsty, sleep on bare 
cement, and all that sort of thing? 




28 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

"If so, you're mistaken! No, you must spare me for 
an hour or two. Inside of that time I ought to make a 
beginning I " 

"A whole hour?" 

"Two would probably be nearer it I prcMnise to be 
back inside of that time." 

" But," and her voice quivered just a trifle,  but suppose some wolf or bear  " 

" Oh, I'm not quite so foolhardy as all that I " he retorted. 
" I'm not going to venture outside till to-morrow. My 
idea is that I can find at least a few essentials right here 
in this building. 

" It's a city in itself  or was. Offices, stores, sh<, 
everything right here together in a lump I It can't possibly 
take me very long to go down and rummage out something 
for your comfort. 

" Now that the first shock and surprise of our awakening are over, we can't go on in this way, you know  h'm ! 
 dressed in  well, such exceedingly primitive garb ! " 

Silently she looked at his dim figure in the dusk. Then 
she stretched out her hand. 

"I'll go too," said she quite simply. 

" You'd better stay. It's safer here." 

" No, I'm going." 

" But if we run into dangers ? " 

" Never mind. Take me with you." 

Over to her he came. He took her hand. In silence he 
pressed it. Thus for a moment they stood. Then, arousing 
himself to action, he said : " First of all, a light." 

"A light? How can you make a light? Why, there 
isn't a match left anywhere in this whole world." 

" I know, but there are other things. Probably my chemical flasks and vials aren't injured. Glass is practically 
imperishable. And if I'm not mistaken, the bottles must 
be lying somewhere in that rubbish heap over by the window." 

He left her wondering, and knelt among the litter. For 




EXPLORATION 29 

a while he silently delved through the triturated bits of 
punky wood and rust-red metal that now represented the 
remains of his chemical cabinet. 

All at once he exclaimed: ' Here's onel And here's 
another I This certainly is luck ! H-m I Shouldn't wonder 
if I got almost all of them back." 

One by one he found a score of thick, ground-glass vials. 
Some were broken, probably by the shock when they and 
the cabinet had fallen, but a good many still remained 
intact. 

AnuMig these were the two essential ones. By the last 
dim ghost of light through the window, and by the sense 
of touch. Stern was able to make out the engraved symbols 
" P " and " S " on these bottles. 

 Phosphorus and sulphur," he commented. " Well, what 
more could I reasonably ask? Here's alcohol, too, hermetically sealed. Not too bad, eh? " 

While the girl watched, with wondering admiration. Stern 
thought hard a moment. Then he set to work. 

First he took a piece of the corroded metal framework of 
the cabinet, a steel strip about eighteen inches long, frail 
in places, but still sufficiently strong to serve his purpose. 

Tearing off some rags from his coat-sleeve, he wadded 
them together into a ball as big as his fist. Around this 
ball he twisted the metal strip, so that it formed at once 
a holder and a handle for the rag-mass. 

With considerable difficulty he worked the glass stopper 
out of the alcohol bottle, and with the fluid saturated the 
rags. Then, on a clear bit of the floor, he spilled out a 
small quantity of the phosphorus and sulphur. 

" This beats gettii fire by friction all hollow," he cheerfully remarked. " I've tried that, too, and I guess it's only 
in books a white man ever succeeds at it. But this way, 
you see, it's simplicity itself." 

Very moderate friction, with a bit of wood from the 
wreckage of the door, sufficed to set the phosphorus ablaze. 
Stem heaped on a few tiny lumps of sulphur. Then, cough



30 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

ing as the acrid fumes arose from the sputter of blue flame, 
he applied the alcohol-soaked torch. 

Instantly a puff of fire shot up, colorless and clear, throwing no very satisfactory light, yet capable of dispelling the 
thickest of the gloom. 

The blaze showed Stern's eager face, long-bearded and 
dusty, as he bent over this crucial experiment. 

The girl, watching closely, felt a strange new thrill of 
confidence and solace. Some realization of the engineer's 
resourcefulness came to her, and in her heart she had confidence that, though the whole wide world had crumbled 
into ruin, yet he would find a way to smooth her path,. to be 
a strength and refu|e for her. 

But Stern had no time for any but matters of intensest 
practicality. From the floor he arose, holding the flambeau 
in one hand, the bottle of alcohol in the other. 

" Come now," bade he, and raised the torch on high to 
light her way, "You're still determined to go?" 

For an answer she nodded. Her eyes gleamed by the 
uncanny light. 

And so, together, he leading out of the room and along 
the wrecked hall, they started on their trip of exploration 
out into the tmknown. 




CHAPTER VI 

TREASURE-TROVE 

Never before had either of them realized just what the 
meaning of forty-eight stories might be. For all their 
memories of this height were associated with smooth-sliding elevators that had whisked them up as though the tremendous height had been the merest trifle. 

This night, however, what with the broken stairs, the 
debris-cumbered hallways, the lurking darkness which the 
torch could hardly hold back from swallowing them, they 
came to a clear understanding of the problem. 

Every few minutes the flame burned low and Stern had 
to drop on more alcohol, holding the bottle high above the 
flame to avoid explosion. 

Long before they had compassed the distance to the 
ground floor the girl lagged with weariness and shrank with 
nameless fears. 

Each black doorway that yawned along their path seemed 
ominous with memories of life that had perished there, of 
death that now reigned all-supreme. 

Elach comer, every niche and crevice, breathed out the 
spirit of the past and of the mystic tragedy which in so 
brief a time had wiped the human race from earth, " as 
a mother wipes the milky lips of her child." 

And Stem, though he said little save to guide Beatrice 
and warn her of unusual difficulties, felt the somber magic 
of the place. No poet, he ; only a man of hard and practical details. Yet he realized that, were he dowered with the 
faculty, here lay matter for an Epic of Death such as no 
Homer ever dreamed, no Virgil ever could have penned. 

31 




32 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Now and then, along the corridors and down the stairways, they chanced on curious little piles of dust, scattered 
at random in fantastic shapes. 

These for a few minutes puzzled Stern, till stooping, he 
stirred one with his hand. Something he saw there made 
him start back with a stifled exclamation. 

"What is it?" cried the girl, startled. "Tell me!" 

But he, realizing the nature of his discovery  for he had 
seen a human incisor tooth, gold-filled, there in the odd 
little heap  straightened up quickly and assumed to smile. 

" It's nothing, nothing at all ! " he answered. " Come, 
we haven't got any time to waste. If we're going to provide ourselves with even a few necessaries before the alcohol's all gone, we've got to be at work 1 " 

And onward, downward, ever farther and farther, he led 
her through the dark maze of ruin, which did not even 
echo to their barefoot tread. 

Like disheveled wraiths they passed, soundlessly, through 
eery labyrinths and ways which might have served as 
types of Coleridge's " caverns measureless to man," so 
utterly drear they stretched out in their ghostly desolation. 

At length, after an eternal time of weariness and labor, 
they managed to make their way down into the ruins of 
the once famous and beautiful arcade which had formerly 
run from Madison Avenue to the square. 

" Oh, how horrible ! " gasped Beatrice, shrinking, as they 
clambered down the stairs and emerged into this scene of 
chaos, darkness, death. 

Where long ago the arcade had stretched its path of light 
and life and beauty, of wealth and splendor, like an epitome of civilization all gathered in that constricted space, the 
little light disclosed stark horror. 

Feeble as a will-o'-the-wisp in that enshrouding dark, the 
torch showed only hints of things  here a fallen pillar, 
there a shattered mass of wreckage where a huge section of 
the ceiling had fallen, yonder a gaping aperture left by 
the disintegration of a wall. 




TREASURE -TROVE 33 

Through all this rubbish and cx>nf usion, over and through 
a score of the little dust-piles which Stem' had so carefully 
avoided explaining to Beatrice, they climbed and waded, 
and with infinite pains slowly advanced. 

" What we need is more light! " exclaimed the engineer 
presently. " We've got to have a bonfire here I ' 

And before long he had collected a considerable pile of 
wood, ripped from the door-ways and window-casings of 
the arcade. This he set fire to, in the middle of the floor. 

Soon a dull, wavering glow began to paint itself upon 
the walls, and to fling the comrades' shadows, huge and 
weird, in dancing mockery across the desolation. 

Strangely enough, many of the large plate-glass windows 
lining the arcade still stood intact. They glittered with the 
uncanny reflections of the fire as the man and woman 
slowly made way down the passage. 

" Sec," exclaimed Stern, pointing. " See all these ruined 
shops? ProbaWy almost everything is worthless. But there 
must be some things left that we can use. 

" See the post-office, down there on the left ? Think of 
the millions in real money, gold and silver, in all these 
safes here and all over the city  in the banks and vaults! 
Millions ! Billions ! 

"Jewels, diamonds, wealth simply inconceivable! Yet 
now a good water supply, some bread, meat, coffee, salt, 
and so on, a couple of beds, a gun or two and some ordinary tools would outweigh them all ! " 

" Clothes, too," the girl suggested. ' Plain cotton cloth 
is worth ten million dollars an inch now." 

" Right," answered Stern, gazing about him with wonder. 
" And I offer a bushel of diamonds for a razor and a pair 
of scissors." Grimly he smiled as he stroked his enormous 
heard. 

" But come, this won't do. There'll be plenty of time 
to look around and discuss things in the morning. Just 
we've got a definite errand. Let's get busy ! " 

Jhttft hen their sear for a few prime necessities of 




34 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

life, there in that charnel-house of civilization, by the dull 
reflections of the firelight and the pallid torch glow. 

Though they forced their way into ten or twelve of the 
arcade shops, they found no clothing, no blankets or fabric 
of any kind that would serve for coverings or to sleep 
upon. Everything at all in the nature of cloth had either 
sunk back into moldering annihilation or had at best grown 
far too fragile to be of the slightest service. 

They found, however, a furrier's shop, and this they 
entered eagerly. 

From rusted metal hodcs a few warped fragments of 
skins still hung, moth-eaten, riddled with holes, ready to 
crumble at the merest touch. 

"There's nothing in any of these to help us," judged 
Stern. " But maybe we might find something else in here." 

Carefully they searched the littered place, all dust and 
horrible disarray, which made sad mockery of the gold-leaf 
sign still visible on the window: "Lange, Importer. All 
the Latest Novelties." 

On the floor Stern discovered three more of those little 
dust-middens which meant human bodies, pitiful remnants of an extinct race, of unknown people in the long 
ago. What had he now in common witii them? The 
remains did not even inspire repugnance in him. 

All at once Beatrice uttered a cry of startled gladness. 

" Look here I A storage chest ! ' 

True enough, there stood a cedar box, all seamed and 
cracked and bulging, yet still retaining a semblance of its 
original shape. 

The copper bindings and the lock were still quite plainly 
to be seen, as the engineer held the torch close, though 
green and corroded with incredible age. 

One effort of Stem's powerful arms sufficed to tip the 
chest quite over. As it fell it burst. Down in a mass of 
pulverized, worm-eaten splinters it disintegrated. 

Out rolled furs, many and many of them, black, and 




TREASURE- TROVE 35 

ydlow, and striped  the pelts of the grizzly, of the leopard, the chetah, the royal Bengal himself. 

" Hurray ! " shouted the man, catching up first one, then 
another, and still a third "' Almost intact A little imperfection here and there doesn't matter. Now we've got 
clothes and beds. 

" What's that ? Yes, maybe they are a trifle warm for 
this season of the year, but this is no time to be particular. 
Sec, now, how do you like thatf " 

Over the girl's shoulders, as he spoke, he flung the tigersldn. 

" Magnificent! " he judged, standing back a pace or two 
and holding up the torch to see her better. " When I find 
you a big gold pin or clasp to fasten that with at the throat 
youll make a picture of another and more splendid 
Boadicea!" 

He tried to laugh at his own words, but merriment sat 
in there in that place, and with such a subject. For the 
woman, thus clad, had suddenly assumed a wild, barbaric 
beauty. 

Bright gleamed her gray eyes by the light of the flambeau ; 
limpid, and deep, and earnest, they looked at Stern. Her 
wonderful hair, shaken out in bewildering masses over the 
striped, tawny savagery of the robe, made colorful contrasts, barbarous, seductive. 

Half hidden, the woman's perfect body, beautiful as that 
of a wood-nymph or a pagan dryad, roused atavistic passions in the engineer. 

He dared speak no other word for the moment, but bent 
beside the shattered chest again and fell to looking over 
the furs. 

A polar-bear skin attracted his attention, and this he 
chose. Then, with it slung across his shoulder, he stood up. 
Come," said he, steadying his voice with an effort, 

come we must be going now. Our light won't hold out 
very much longer. We've got to find food and drink before 



M 




36 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

the alcohol's all gone ; got to look out for practical affairs, 
whatever happens. Let's be going." 

Fortune favored them. 

In the wreck of a small fancy grocer's booth down toward 
the end of the arcade, where the post-office had been, they 
came upon a stock of goods in glass jars. 

All the tinned foods had long since perished, but the 
impermeable glass seemed to have preserved fruits and 
vegetables of the finer sort, and chipped beef and the like, 
in a state of perfect soundness. 

Best of all, they discovered the remains of a case of 
mineral water. The case had crumbled to dust, but fourteen bottles of water were still intact. 

" Pile three or four of these into my fur robe here," 
directed Stem. " Now, a few of the other jars  that's 
right. To-morrow we'll come down and clean up the whole 
stock. But we've got enough for now." 

"We'd best be getting back up the stairs again," said 
he. And so they started. 

"Are you going to leave that fire burning?" asked the 
girl, as they passed the middle of the arcade. 

" Yes. It can't do any harm. Nothing to catch here; 
only old metal and cement. Besides, it would take too much 
time and labor to put it out." 

Thus they abandoned the gruesome place and. began the 
long, exhausting climb. 

It must have taken them an hour and a half at least to 
reach their aerie. Both found their strength taxed to the 
utmost. 

Before they were much more than halfway up, the ultimate drop of alcohol had been burned. 

The last few hundred feet had to be made by slow, laborious feeling, aided only by such dim reflections of the gibbous moon as glimmered through a window, cobweb-hung, 
or through some break in the walls. 

At length, however  for all things have an end  breath



REASURE-TROVE 37 



less and spent, they found their refuge. And soon after 
that, clad in their savage robes, they supped. 

Allan Stem, consulting engineer, and Beatrice Kendrick, 
stenographer, now king and queen of the whole wide world 
domain (as they feared), sat together by a little blaze of 
punky wood fragments that flickered on the eroded floor. 

They ate with their fingers and drank out of the bottles, 
S(ms apology. Strange were their speculations, their wonderings, their plans  now discussed specifically, now halfvcMced by a mere word that thrilled them both with sudden, 
pcM[nant emotion. 

An so an hour passed, and the night deepened toward 
the birth of anotMjy. The fire burned low and died, 
for they had littlHpMish it with. 

Down sank the m6,Tier pale light dimming as she went, 
her faint illumination wanly creeping across the disordered, 
wrack-strewn floor. 

And at length Stem, in the outer office, Beatrice in the 
other, they wrapped themselves within their furs and laid 
them down to sleep. 

Despite the age-long trance from which they both had 
but so recently emerged, a strange lassitude weighed on 
them. 

Yet long after Beatrice had lost herself in dreams, Stern 
lay and thought strange thoughts, yearning and eager 
thoughts, there in the impenetrable gloom. 



t 





CHAPTER VII, 

THE OUTER YORLD 

Before daybreak the engineer was up again, and active. 
Now that he faced the light of morning, with a thousand 
difficult problems closing in on evju|and, he put aside 
his softer moods, his visions /fKmFi     
scientific man he was  addressed Mmself to the urgent 
matters in hand. 

" The girl's safe enough alone, here, for a while," thought 
he, looking in upon her where she lay, calm as a child, 
folded within the clinging masses of the tiger-skin. 

" I must be out and away for two or three hours, at the 
very least. I hope she'll sleep till I get back. If not  
what then?" 

He pondered a moment ; then, coming over to the charred 
remnants of last night's fire, chose a bit of burnt wood. 
With this he scrawled in large, rough letters on a fairly 
smooth stretch of the wall: 

" Back soon. All O. K. Don't worry." 

Then, turning, he set out on the long, painful descent 
again to the earth-level. 

Garish now, and doubly terrible, since seen with more 
than double clearness by the graying dawn, the world-ruin 
seemed to him.  

Strong of body and of nerve as he was, he cduld not 
help but shudder at the numberless traces of sudden and 
pitiless death which met his gaze.  

Everywhere lay those dust-heaps, with here or there a 
tooth, a ring, a bit of jewelry showing  everywhere he 

38 




/he outer world 39 

saw them, all the way down the stairs, in every room and 
office he peered into, and in the time-ravished confusion 
of the arcade. 

But this was scarcely the time for reflections of any sort. 
Life called, and labor, and duty ; not mourning for the dead 
world, nor even wonder or pity at the tragedy which had 
so mysteriously befallen. 

And as the man made his way over and through the 
universal wreckage, he took counsel with himself. 

 First of all, water ! " thought he. " We can't depend 
on the 'bottled supply. Of course, there's the Hudson; 
but its brackish, if not downright salt. I've got to find some 
fresh and pure sufly, close at hand. That's the prime 
necessity of life.  

"What with the canned stuff, and such game as I can 
kill, there's bound to be food enough for a while. But 
a good water-supply we must have, and at once ! " 

Yet, prudent rather for the sake of Beatrice than for 
his own, he decided that he ought not to issue out, unarmed, 
into this new and savage world, of which he had as yet 
no very definite knowledge. And for a while he searched, 
hoping to find some weapon or other. 

" I've got to have an ax, first of all," said he. " That's 
man's first need, in any wilderness. Where shall I find 
one; 

He thought a moment. 

" Ah ! In the basements ! " exclaimed he. " Maybe I 
can locate an engine-room, a store-room, or something of 
that sort. There's sure to be tools in a place like that." 
And, laying off the bear-skin, he prepared to explore the 
rons under the ground-level. 

He tised more than half an hour, through devious ways 
and hard labor, to make his way to the desired spot. The 
ancient stair-way, leading down, he could not find. 
., But by tiambering down one of the elevator-shafts, digfpag toes and fingers into the crevices in the metal f ramew<n1c and the cracks in the concrete, he managed at last 




40 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

to reach a vaulted sub-cellar, festooned with webs, damp, 
noisome and obscure. 

Considerable light glimmered in from a broken sidewalkgrating above, and through a gaping, jagged hole near one 
end of the cellar, beneath which lay a badly-broken stone. 

The engineer figured that this block had fallen from the 
tower and come to rest only here ; and this awoke him to a 
new sense of ever-present peril. At any moment of the night 
or day, he realized, some such mishap was imminent. 

" Eternal vigilance 1 " he whispered to himself. Then, 
dismissing useless fears, he set about the task in hand. 

By the dim illumination from above, he was able to take 
cognizance of the musty-smelling place, which, on the whole, 
was in a better state of repair than the arcade. The first 
cellar )rielded nothing of value to him, but, making his way 
through a low vaulted door, he chanced into what must 
have been one of the smaller, auxiliary engine-rooms. 

This, he found, contained a battery of four dynamos, 
a small seepage-pump, and a crumbling marble switch-board 
with part of the wiring still comparatively intact. 

At sight of all this valuable machinery scaled and pitted 
with rust. Stern's brows contracted with a feeling akin to 
pain. The engineer loved mechanism of all sorts; its care 
and use had been his life. 

And now these mournful relics, strange as that may seem, 
affected him more strongly than the little heaps of dust 
which marked the spots where human beings had fallen 
in sudden, inescapable death. 

Yet even so, he had no time for musing. 

" Tools ! " cried he, peering about the dintit vaulfL 
"Tools  I must have some. Till I find tools, I'm helpless ! " 

Search as he might, he discovered no ax in the place, but 
in place of it he unearthed a sledge-hammer. Though corroded, it was still quite serviceable. Oddly enough, the 
oak handle was almost intact. 

" Kyanized wood, probably," reflected he, as he laid the 




THE OUTER WORLD 41 

dectge to one side and bfan delving into a bed of dust 
that had evidently been a work-bench. " Ah ! And here's 
a chisel! A spanner, too! A heap of rusty old wire 
nails! ' 

Delightedly he examined these treasures. 

" They're worth more to me," he exulted, " than all the 
gold between here and what's left of San Francisco!" 

He found nothing more of value in the litter. Everything else was rusted beyond use. So, having convinced him8 that nothing more remained, he gathered up his finds 
and started back whence he had come. 

After some quarter-hour of hard labor, he managed to 
transport everything up into the arcade. 

" Now for a glimpse of the outer world ! " quoth he. 

Gripping the sledge well in hand, he made his way 
through the confused nexus of ruin. Disguised as everything now was, fallen and disjointed, moldering, blighted 
by age incalculable, still the man recognized many familiar 
features. 

Here, he recalled, the telephone-booths had been; there, 
the information desk. Yonder, again, he remembered the 
little curved counter where once upon a time a man in uniform had sold tickets to such as had wanted to visit the 
tower. 

Counter now was dust; ticket-man only a crumble of 
fine, grayish powder. Stern shivered slightly, and pressed 

CO. 

As he approached the outer air, he noticed that many a 
grassy tuft and creeping vine had rooted in the pavement 
of the arcade, up-prying the marble slabs and cracking the 
once magnificent floor. 

The doorway itself was almost choked by a tremendous 
Norway pine which had struck root close to the building, 
and now insolently blocked that way where, other-time, 
many thousand men and women every day had come and 
gone. 

But Stem clambered out past this obstacle, testing the 




f 



\ 



42 DARKNESS'AND DAWN 

floor with his sledge, as he went, lest he fall through an 
unseen weak spot into the depths of coal-cellars below. 
And presently he reached the outer air, unharmed. 

"But  but, the sidewalk?" cried he, amazed. "The 
street  the Square? Where are they?" And in astonishment he stopped, staring. 

The view from the tower, though it had told him something of the changes wrought, had given him no adequate 
conception of their magnitude. 

He had expected some remains of human life to show 
upon the earth, some semblance of the metropolis to remain 
in the street. But no, nothing was there; nothing at all 
on the ground to show that he was in the heart of a city. 

He could, indeed, catch glimpses of a building here or 
there. Through the tangled thickets that grew close up 
' to the age-worn walls of the Metropolitan, he could make 
out a few bits of tottering construction on the south side 
of what had been Twenty-Third Street. 

But of the street itself, no trace remained  no pavement, 
y no sidewalk, no curb.. And even so near and so conspicuous an object as the wreck of the Flatiron was now entirely 
concealed by the dense forest. 

Soil had formed thickly over all the surface. Huge oaks 
and pines flourished there as confidently as though in the 
heart of the Maine forest, crowding ash and beech for room. 

Under the man's feet, even as he stood close by the 
building  which was thickly overgrown with ivy and with 
ferns and bushes rooted in the crannies  the pine-needles 
bent in deep, pungent beds. 

Birch, maple, poplar and all the natives of the American 
woods shouldered each other lustily. By the state of the 
fresh young leaves, just bursting their sbeaths. Stem knew 
the season was mid-May. 

Through the wind-swayed branches, little flickering 
patches of morning sunlight met his gaze, as they played 
and quivered on the forest moss or over the sere pine-spills. 

Even upon the huge, squared stones which here and there 




THE OUTER WORLD 43 

lay in disorder, and which Stem knew must have fallen 
from the tower, the moss grew very thick; and more than 
one such block had been rent by frost and growing things. 
"How long has it been, great Heavens 1 How long?" 
cried the engineer, a sudden fear creeping into his heart. 
For this, the reasserted dominance of nature, bore in on 
him with more appalling force than an3rthing he had yet 



About him he looked, trying to get his bearings in that 
strange mUieu. 

" Why," said he, quite slowly, " it's  it's just as though 
some cosmic jester, all-powerful, had scooped up the fragments of a ruined city and tossed them pell-mell into the 
core of the Adirondacks! It's horrible  ghastly  incredible!' 

Dazed and awed, he stood as in a dream, a strange figure 
with hb mane of hair, his flaming, trailing beard, his rags 
(for he had left the bear-skin in the arcade), his muscular 
arm, knotted as he held the sledge over his shoulder. 

Well might he have been a savage of old times ; one of 
the early barbarians of Britain, perhaps, peering in wonder 
at the ruins of some deserted Roman camp. 

The chatter of a squirrel high up somewhere in the 
branches of an oak, recalled him to his wits. Down came 
spiralling a few bits of bark and acorn-shell, quite in the 
old familiar way. 

Farther off among the woods, a robin's throaty morning 
notes drifted to him on the odorous breeze. A wren, surprisingly tame, chippered busily. It hopped about, not 
ten feet from him, entirely fearless. 

Stem realized that it was now seeing a man for the first 
time in its life, and ibat it had no fear. His bushy brows 
contracted as he watched the little brown body jiunping 
from twig to twig in the pine above him. 

A deep, full breath he drew. Higher, still higher he 
raised his head. Far through the leafy screen he saw the 
overbending arch of sky in tiny patches of turquoise. 




44 



DARKNESS AND DAWN 



"The same old world, after all  the same, in spite of 
everything  thank Godl" he whispered, his very tone a 
prayer of thanks. 

And suddenly, though why he could not have told, the 
grim engineer's eyes grew wet with tears that ran, unheeded, 
down his heavy-bearded cheeks. 



CHAPTER VIII 

A SIGN OF PERIL 

Stern's weakness  as he judged it  lasted but a minute. 
Then, realizing even more fully than ever the necessity for 
immediate labor and exploration, he tightened his grip upon 
the sledge and set forth into the forest of Madison Square. 

Away from him scurried a cotton-tail. A snake slid, 
hissing, out of sight under a jungle of fern. A butterfly, 
dull brown and ocher, settled upon a branch in the sunlight, 
where it bn slowly opening and shutting its wings. 

' H-m ! That's a Danaus plexippus, right enough," commented the man. " But there are some odd changes in it. 
Yes, indeed, certainly some evolutionary variants. Must 
be a tremendous time since we went to sleep, for sure; 
probably very much longer than I dare guess. That's a 
problem I've got to go to work on, before many days ! " 

But now for the present he dismissed it again ; he pushed 
it aside in the press of urgent matters. And, parting the 
undergrowth, he broke his crackling way through the deep 
wood. 

He had gone but a few hundred yards when an exclamation of surprised delight burst" from his lips. 

"Water! Water!" he cried. "What? A spring, so 
close? A pool, right here at hand? Good luck, by Jove, 
the very first thing I " 

And, stopping where he stood, he gazed at it with keen, 
unalloyed pleasure. 

There, so near to the massive bulk of the tower that the 
vast shadow lay broadly across it. Stem had suddenly come 

45 




46 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

upon as beautiful a little watercourse as ever bubbled forth 
under the yews of Arden or lapped the willows of Hesperides. 

He beheld a roughly circular depression in the woods, 
fern-banked and fringed with purple blooms ; at the bottom 
sparkled a spring, leaf-bowered, cool, Elysian. 

From this, down through a channel which the water 
must have worn for itself by slow erosion, a small brook 
trickled, widening out into a pool some fifteen feet across; 
whence, brimming over, it purled away through the young 
sweet-flags and rushes with tempting little woodland notes. 

" What a find ! " cried the engineer. Forward he strode. 
" So, then ? Deer-tracks ? " he exclaimed, noting a few 
dainty hoof -prints in the sandy margin. " Great ! " And, 
filled with exultation, he dropped beside the spring. 

Over it he bent. Setting his bearded lips to the sweet 
water, he drank enormous, satisfying drafts. 

Sated at last, he stood up again and peered about him. 
All at once he burst out into jovious laughter. 

" Why, this is certainly an old friend of mine, or I'm a 
liar ! " he cried out. " This spring is nothing more or less 
than the lineal descendant of Madison Square fountain, 
what? But good Lord, what a change! 

" It would make a splendid subject for an article in the 
 Annals of Applied Geology.  Only  well, there aren't 
any annals, now, and what's more, no readers ! " 

Down to the wider pool he walked. 

" Stern, my boy," said he, " here's where you get an A-i, 
first-class dip ! " 

A minute later, stripped to the buff, the man lay splashing vigorously in the water. From top to toe he scrubbed 
himself vigorously with the fine, white sand. And when, 
some minutes later, he rose up again, the tingle and joy 
of life filled him in every nerve. 

For a minute he looked contemptuously at his rags, lying 
there on the edge of the pool. Then with a grunt he kicked 
them aside. 



A SIGN OF PERIL 47 

 I guess we'll dispense with those," judged he. " The 
bear-skin, back in the building, there, will be enough." He 
picked up his sledge, and, heaving a mighty breath of comfort, set out for the tower again. 

 Ah, but that was certainly fine 1 " he exclaimed. " I 
feel ten years younger, already. Ten, from what ? X minus 
ten, equals  ?" 

Thoughtfully, as he walked across the elastic moss and 
over the pine-needles, he strdced his beard. 

 Now, if I could only get a hair-cut and shave ! " said 
he ' Wdl, why not ? Wouldn't that surprise her, though ? " 

The idea strong upon him, he hastened his steps, and 
soon was back at the door close to the huge Norway pine. 
But here he did not enter. Instead, he turned to the right. 

Plowing through the woods, climbing over fallen columns and shattered building-stones, Rushing a covey of 
loud-winged partridges, parting the bushes that grew 
thickly along the base of the wall, he now found himself 
in what had long ago been Twenty-Third Street. 

No sign, now of paving or car-tracks  nothing save, on 
the other side of the way, crumbling lines of ruin. As 
he worked his way among the detritus of the Metropolitan, 
he kept sharp watch for the wreckage of a hardware store. 

Not until he had crossed the ancient line of Madison 
Avenue and penetrated some hundred yards still further 
along Twenty-Third Street, did he find what he sought. 

" Ah ! " he suddenly cried. " Here's something now ! " 

And, scrambling over a pile of grass-grown rubbish with 
a couple of time-bitten iron wheels peering out  evidently 
the wreckage of an electric car  he made his way around 
a gaping hole where a side-walk had caved in and so reached 
the interior of a shop. 

" Yes, prospects here, certainly prospects ! " he decided, 
carefully inspecting the place. "If this didn't use to be 
Currier & Brown's place, I'm away off my bearings. There 
ought to be something left. " 

"Ah! Would you?" and he flung a hastily-snatched 




48 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

rode at a rattlesnake that had begun its dry, chirring defiance on top of what once had been a counter. 

The snake vanished, while the rock rebounding, crashed 
through glass. 

Stem wheeled about with a cry of joy. For there, he 
saw, still stood near the back of the shc a showcase from 
within which he caught a sheen of tarnished metal. 

Quickly he ran toward this, stumbling over the loose 
flooring, mossy and grass-grown. There in the case, preserved as you have seen Egyptian relics two or three thousand years old, in museums, the engineer beheld incalculable treasures. He thrilled with a savage, strange delight. 

Another blow, with the sledge, demolished the remaining glass. 

He trembled with excitement as he chose what he most 
needed. 

"I certainly do understand now," said he, "why the 
New Zealanders took Captain Cook's old barrel-hoops and 
refused his cash. Same here ! All the money in this town 
couldn't buy this rusty knife  " as he seized a corroded 
blade set in a horn handle, yellowed with age. And eageriy 
he continued the hunt. 

Fifteen minutes later he had accumulated a pair of 
scissors, two rubber combs, another knife, a revolver, an 
automatic, several handfuls of cartridges and a Cosmos 
bottle. 

All these he stowed in a warped, mildewed remnant of 
a Gladstone bag, taken from a comer where a broken glass 
sig, " Leather Goods," lay among the rank confusion. 

" I guess I've got enough, now, for the first load," he 
judged, more excited than if he had chanced upon a blueclay bed crammed with Cullinan diamonds. " It's a beginning, anyhow. Now for Beatrice ! " 

Joyously as a schoolboy with a pocketful of new-won 
marbles, he made his exit from the ruins of the hardware 
store, and started back toward the tower. 




A SIGN OF PERIL 49 

Btxt hardly had he gone a hundred feet when all at once 
he drew back with a sharp cry of wonder and alarm. 

There at his feet, in plain view under a little maple sapling, lay something that held him frozen with astonishment 

He snatched it up, dropping the sledge to do so. 

"What? Whatf" he stammered; and at the thing he 
stared with widened, uncomprehending eyes. 

"Merciful God! How what ?" cried he. 

The thing he held in his hand was a broad, fiat, flint 
(utegai-fomil 




CHAPTER IX 



HEADWAY AGAINST ODDS 



Stern gazed at this alarming object with far more trepidation than he would have eyed a token authentically 
labeled : " Direct from Mars." 

For the space of a full half-minute he found no word, 
grasped no coherent thought, came to no action save to 
stand there, thunder-struck, holding the rotten leather bag 
in one hand, the spear-head in the other. 

Then, suddenly, he shouted a curse and made as though 
to fling it clean away. But ere it had left his grasp, he 
checked himself. 

" No, there's no use in that," said he, quite slowly. " If 
this thing is what it appears to be, if it isn't merely some 
freakish bit of stone weathered off somewhere, why, it 
means  my God, what doesn't it mean?" 

He shuddered, and glanced fearfully about him; all his 
calculations already seemed crashing down about him; all 
his plans, half-formulated, appeared in ruin. 

New, vast and unknown factors of the struggle broadened 
rapidly before his mental vision, if this thing were really 
what it looked to be. 

Keenly he peered at the bit of flint in his palm. There 
it lay, real enough, an almost perfect specimen of the 
flaker's art, showing distinctly where the wood had been 
applied to the core to peel off the many successive layers. 

It could not have been above three and a half inches 
long, by one and a quarter wide, at its broadest part. The 
haft, where it had been hollowed to hold the lashings, was 
well marked. . 

SO 




HEADWAY AGAINST ODDS 51 

A diminutive object and a skilfully-formed one. At any 
other time or place, the engineer would have considered the 
finding a good fortune; but now  ! 

' Yet after all/' he said aloud, as if to convince himself, 
" it's only a bit of stone! What can it prove? " 

His subconsciousness seemed to make answer :  So, too, 
the sign that Robinson Crusoe found on the beach was 
only a human foot-mark. Do not deceive yourself ! " 

In deep thought the engineer stood there a moment or 
two. Then, "Bahl" cried he. "What does it matter, 
anyhow? Let it come  whatever it isl If I hadn't just 
happened to find this, I'd have been none the wiser." And 
he dropped the bit of flint into the bag along with the 
other things. 

Again he picked up his sledge, and, now more cautiously, 
once more started forward. 

" All I can do," he thought, " is just to go right ahead 
as though this hadn't happened at all. If trouble comes, it 
comes, that's all. I gess I can meet it. Always have got 
away with it, so far. We'll see. What's on the cards has 
got to be played to a finish, and the best hand wins 1 " 

He retraced his way to the spring, where he carefully 
rinsed and filled the Cosmos bottle for Beatrice. Then 
back to the Metropolitan he came, donned his bear-skin, 
which he fastened with a wire nail, and started the long 
climb. His sledge he carefully hid on the second floor, 
in an office at the left of the stairway. 

" Don't think much of this hammer, after all," said he. 
" What I need is an ax. Perhaps this afternoon I can have 
another go at that hardware place and find one. 

If the handle's gone, I can haft it with green wood. 
With a good ax and these two revolvers  till I find some 
rifles  I guess we're safe enough, spear-heads or not ! " 

About him he glanced at the ever-present molder and 
decay. This office, he could easily see, had been both spadoas and luxurious, but now it offered a sorry spectacle. 
In the dust over by a window something glitlered dully. 



f 




S2 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Stern found it was a fragment of a beveled mirror, which 
had probably hirng there and, when the frame rotted, had 
dropped. He brushed it oflf and looked eagerly into it. 

A cry of amazement burst from him. 

" Do I look like thatf " he shouted. " Well, I won't, 
for long!" 

He propped the glass up on the steel beam of the window-opening, and got the scissors out of the bag. Ten 
minutes later, the face of Allan Stern bore some resemblance to its original self. True enough, his hair remained 
a bit jagged, especially in the back, his brows were somewhat uneven, and the point to which his beard was trimmed 
was far from perfect 

But none the less his wild savagery had given place to 
a certain aspect of civilization that made the white bearskin over his shoulders look doubly strange. 

Stem, however, was well pleased. He smiled in satisfaction. 

"What will she think, and say?" he wondered, as he 
once more took up the bag and started on the long, exhausting climb. 

Sweating profusely, badly "blown,"  for he had not 
taken much time to rest on the way  the engineer at last 
reached his offices in the tower. 

Before entering, he called the girl's name. 

" Beatrice ! Oh, Beatrice ! Are you awake, and visible? " 

" All right, come in ! " she answered cheerfully, and 
came to meet him in the doorway. Out to him she stretched 
her hand, in welcome; and the smile she gave him set his 
heart pounding. 

He had to laugh at her astonishment and naive delight 
over his changed appearance; but all the time his eyes 
were eagerly devouring her beauty. 

For now, freshly-awakened, full of new life and vigor 
after a sound night's sleep, the girl was magnificent. 

The morning light disclosed new glints of color in her 
wondrous hair, as it lay broad and silken on the tiger-sknu 




HEADWAY AGAINST ODDS 53 

This she had secured at the throat and waist with bits of 
metal taken from the wreckage of the filing-cabinet 

Stem promised himself that ere long he would find her 
a profuskm of gold pins and chains, in some of the Fifth 
Avemie shops, to serve her purposes till she could fashion 
real clothing. 

As she gave him her hand, the Bengal skin fell back 
from her rotmd, warm, cream-white arm. 

At sight of it, at vision of that massy crown of hair and 
of those gray, penetrant, questioning eyes, the man's spent 
breath quickened. 

He turned his own eyes quickly away, lest she should 
read his thought, and began speaking  of what ? He hardly 
knew. Anything, till he could master himself. 

But through it all he knew that in his whole life, till 
now self-centered, analytical, cold, he never had felt such 
real, spontaneous happiness. 

The touch of her fingers, soft and warm, dispelled his 
every anxiety. The thought that he was working, now, for 
her ; serving her ; striving to preserve and keep her, thrilled 
him with joy. 

And as some foregleam of the future came to him, his 
fears dropped from him like those outworn rags he had discarded in the forest. 

" Well, so we're both up and at it, again," he exclaimed, 
cocnmonplacely enough, his voice a bit uncertain. Stern 
had walked narrow girders six hundred feet sheer up; he 
had worked in caissons under tide-water, with the airpumps driving full tilt to keep death out. 

He had swung in a bosun's-chair down the face of the 
Yosemite Canon at Cathedral Spires. But never had he 
felt emotions such as now. And greatly he marveled. 

" I've had luck," he continued. " See here, and here?" 

He showed her his treasures, all the contents of the bag, 
except the spear-point. Then, giving her the Cosmos bottle, he bade her drink. Gratefully she did so, while he explained to her the finding of the spring. 



! 




54 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Her face aglow with eagerness and brave enthusiasm, 
she listened. But when he told her about the bathing-pool, 
an envious expression came to her. 

" It's not fair," she protested, " for you to monopolize 
that. If you'll show me the place  and just stay around 
in the woods, to see that nothing hurts me  " 

"You'll take a dip, too?" 

Eagerly she nodded, her eyes beaming.  

" I'm just dying for one ! " she exclaimed. " Think 1 I 
haven't had a bath, now, for x years I " 

" I'm at your service," declared the engineer. And for 
a moment a little silence came between them, a silence so 
profound that they could even hear the faint, far cheepings 
of the mud-swallows in the tower stair, above. 

At the back of Stem's brain still lurked a haunting fear 
of the wood, of what the assegai-point might portend, but 
he dispelled it. 

" Well, come along down," bade he. " It's getting late, 
already. But first, we must take just one more look, by 
this fresh morning light, from the platform up above, 
there?" 

She assented readily. Together, talking of their first 
urgent needs, of their plans for this new day and for this 
wonderful, strange life that now confronted them, they 
climbed the stairs again. Once more they issued out on 
to the weed-grown platform of red tiles. 

There they stood a moment, looking out with wonder 
over that vast, still, marvelous prospect of life-in-death. 
Suddenly the engineer spoke. 

"Tell me," said he, "where did you get that line of 
verse you quoted last night? The one about this vast cityheart all lying still, you know?" 

"That? Why, that was from Wordsworth's Sonnet on 
London Bridge, of course," she smiled up at him. " You 
remember it now, don't you ? " 

" No-o," he disclaimed a trifle dubiously. " I  that is, 
I never was much on poetry, you understand. It wasn't 



HEADWAY AGAINST ODDS 55 

t 

exactly in my line. But never mind. How did it go? I'd 
like to hear it, tremendously." 

"I don't just recall the whole poem," she answered 
thoQtf ully. " But I know part of it ran : 

' This city now doth like a garment wear 

The beauty of the morning. Silent, bare. 

Ships, towers, domes, theaters, and temples' lie 

Open unto the fields and to the sky 
'All bright and glittering in the smokeless air 

A miHnent she paused to think. The sun, lancing its 
long and level rays across the water and the vast dead city, 
irradiated her face. 

Instinctively, as she looked abroad over that wondrous 
panorama, she raised both bare arms ; and, clad in the tigerskin alone, stood for a little space Hke some Parsee priestess, 
sun-worshiping, on her tower of silence. 

Stem looked at her, amazed. 

Was this, could this indeed be the girl he had employed, 
in the old days  the other days of routine and of tedium, 
of orders and specifications and dry-as-dust dictation ? As 
though from a strange spell he aroused himself. 
The poem?" exclaimed he. "What next?" 
Oh, that? Id almost forgotten about that; I was 
dreaming. It goes this way, I think: 

'Never did the sun more beautifully steep 
In his first splendor valley, rock, or hill. 

Ne'er saw I, never felt a calm so deep; 
The river glideth ot his own sweet will. 

Dear God! the very houses seem asleep. 

And all this mighty heart is standing still! ' 






She finished the tremendous classic almost in a whisper. 

They both stood silent a moment, gazing out together 

on that strange, inexplicable fulfilment of the poet's vision. 




56 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Up to them, through the crystal morning air, rose a faint, 
small sound of waters, from the brooklet in the forest. The 
nesting birds, below, were busy " in song and solace "; and 
through the golden sky above, a swallow slanted on sharp 
wing toward some unseen, leafy goal. 

Far out upon the river, faint specks of white wheeled and 
hovered  3, flock of swooping gulls, snowy and beautiful 
and free. Their pinions flashed, spiralled and sank to rest 
on the wide waters. 

Stem breathed a sigh. His right arm slipped about the 
sinuous, fur-robed body of the girl. 

' Come, now ! " said he, with returning practicality. 
"Bath for you, breakfast for both of us  then we must 
buckle down to work. Come!'' 



3 




CHAPTER X 

f 

TERROR 

Noon found them far advanced in the preliminaries of their 
hard adventuring. 

Working together in a strong and frank companionship 
 the past temporarily forgotten and the future still put 
far away  half a day's labor advanced them a long distance 
on the road to safety. 

Even these few hours sufficed to prove that, unless some 
strange, untoward accident befell, they stood a more than 
equal chance of winning out. 

Realizing to begin with, that a home on the forty-eighth 
story of the tower was entirely impractical, since it would 
mean that most of their time would have to be used in 
laborious climbing, they quickly changed their dwelling. 

They chose a suite of offices on the fifth floor, looking 
directly out over and into the cool green beauty of Madison Forest. In an hour or so, they cleared out the bats 
and spiders, the rubbish and the dust, and made the place 
very decently presentable. 

" Well, that's a good beginning, anyhow," remarked the 
engineer, standing back and looking critically at the finished 
work. 

" I don't see why we shouldn't make a fairly comfortable 
home out of this, for a while. It's not too high for ease, 
and it's high enough for safety  to keep prowling bears 
and wolves and  and other things from exploring us in the 

He laughed, but memories of the spear-head tinged his 

57 




S8 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

merriment with apprehension. " In a day or two TU make 
some kind of an outer door, or barricade. But first, I 
need that ax and some other things. Can you spare me 
for a while, now ? " 

" I'd rather go along, too," she answered wistfully, from 
the window-sill where she sat resting. 

" No, not this time, please ! " he entreated. " First I've 
got to go 'way to the top of the tower and bring down 
my chemicals and all the other things up there. 

" Then Tm going out on a hunt for dishes, a lamp, scHne 
oil and no end of things. You save your strength for a 
while ; stay here and keep house and be a good girl 1 " 

"All right," she acceded, smiling a little sadly. "But 
really, I feel quite able to go." 

" This afternoon, perhaps ; now now. Good-by 1 " And 
he started for the door. Then a thought struck him. He 
turned and came back. 

" By the way," said he, " if we we can fix up some kind of 
a holster, I'll take one of those revolvers. With the best of 
this leather here," nodding at the Gladstone bag, '' I should 
imagine we could manufacture something serviceable." 

They planned the holster together, and he cut it out 
with his knife, while she slit leather thoj to lash it with. 
Presently it was done, and a strap to tic it round his waist 
with  a crude, rough thing, but just as useful as though 
finished with the utmost skill. 

"We'll make another for you when I get home this 
noon/' he remarked picking up the automatic and a handful 
of cartridges. Quickly he filled the magazine. The shells 
were green with verdigris, and many a rust-spot disfigured 
the one-time brightness of the arm. 

As he stepped over to the window, aimed and pulled the 
trigger, a sharp and welcome report burst from the weixm. 
And a few leaves, clipped from an oak in the forest, d 
zagged down in the bright, warm sunlight 

" I guess she'll do all right ! " he laughed, sliding the ugly 
weapon into his new holster. " You see, the powder and 




TERROR 59 

fulimiiate, sealed up in the cartridges, are practically imperishable. Here, let me load yours, too. 

" If you want something to do, you can practise on that 
dead limb out there, see? And don't be afraid of wasting 
ammunition. There must be millions of cartridges in this 
old burg  millions  all ours I " 

Again he laughed, and handing her the other pistol, now 
fully loaded, took his leave. Before he had clmibed a 
htmdred feet up the tower stair, he heard a slow, uneven 
pop pop popping, and with satisfaction knew that Beatrice was already perfecting herself in the use of the revolver. 

 And she may need it, too  we both may, badly  before 
we know it ! " thought he, frowning, as he kept upon his 
way. 

This reflection weighed in so heavily upon him, all due 
to the flint assegai-point, that he made still another excuse 
that afternoon and so got out of taking the girl into the 
forest with him on his exploring trip. 

The excuse was all the more plausible inasmuch as he 
left her enough work at home to do, making some real 
clothing and some sandals for them both. This task, now 
that the girl had scissors to use, was not too hard. 

Stem brought her great armfuls of the furs from the 
shop in the arcade, and left her busily and happily employed. 

He spent the afternoon in scouting through the entire 
neighborhood from Sixth Avenue as far east as Third and 
from Twenty- Seventh Street down through Union Square. 

Revolver in his left hand, knife in his right to cut 
away troublesome bush or brambles, or to slit impeding 
vine-masses, he progressed slowly and observantly. 

He kept his eyes open for big game, but  though he 
found moose-tracks at the comer of Broadway and Nineteenth  he ran into nothing more formidable than a l)mx, 
which snarled at him from a tree overhanging the mournful 
rttinft of the Farragut moniunent. 




6o DARKNESS AND DAWN 

One shot sent it bounding and screaming with pain, out 
of view. Stem noted with satisfaction that blood followed 
its trail. 

" Guess I haven't forgotten how to shoot in all these x 
years I " he commented, stooping to examine the spoor. 
" That may come in handy later ! " 

Then, still wary and watchful, he continued his exploration. 

He fotmd that the city, as such, had entirely ceased to be. 

" Nothing but lines and monstrous rubbish-heaps of 
ruins," he sized up the situation, "traversed by lanes of 
forest and overgrown with every sort of vegetation. 

"Every wooden building completely wiped out. Brick 
and stone ones practically gone. Steel alone standing, and 
that in rotten shape. Nothing at all intact but the few con
" Ha! ha! " And he laughed satirically. " If the builders of the twentieth century could have foreseen this they 
wouldn't have thrown quite such a chest, eh? And they 
talked of engineering ! " 

Useless though it was, he felt a certain pride in noting 
that the Osterhaut Building, on Seventeenth Street, had 
lasted rather better than the average. 

" My work ! " said he, nodding with grim satisfaction, 
then passed on. 

Into the Subway he penetrated at Eighteenth Street, 
climbing with difficulty down the choked stairway, through 
bushes and over masses of ruin that had fallen from tiit 
roof. The great tube, he saw, was choked with litter. 

Slimy and damp it was, with a mephitic smell and ugly 
pools of water settled in the ancient road-bed. The rails 
were wholly gone in places. In others only rotten fragments of steel remained. 

A goggle-eyed toad stared impudently at him from a 
long tangle of rubbish that had been a train  stalled there 
forever by the final block-signal of death. 

Through the broken arches overhead the rain and storms 



TERROR 6i 

of ages had beaten down, and lush grasses flourished here 
and there, where sunlight could penetrate. 

No human dust-heaps here, as in the shelter of the arcade. 
Long since every vestige of man had been swept away. 
Stem shuddered, more depressed by the sight here than at 
any other place so far visited. 

' And they boasted of a work for all time ! " whispered JU 
he, awed by the horror of it. " They boasted  like the  
financiers, the churchmen, the merchants, everybody! 
Boasted of their institutions, their city, their country. And 



9t 



Out he clambered presently, terribly depressed by what 
be had witnessed, and set to work laying in still more supplies from the wrecked shops. Now for the first time, 
his wonder and astonishment having largely abated, he 
bfan to feel the horror of this loneliness. 

 No life here ! Nobody to speak to  except the girl 1 ' 
he exclaimed aloud, the sound of his own voice uncanny in 
that woodland street of death. "All gone, everything! 
My Heavens, suppose I didn't have her? How long could 
I go on alone, and keep my mind ? " 

The thought terrified him. He put it resolutely away and 
went to work. Wherever he stumbled upon anything of 
value he eagerly seized it. 

The labor, he found, kept him from the subconscious 
dread of what might happen to Beatrice or to himself if 
either should meet with any mishap. The consequences 
of either one dying, he knew, must be horrible beyond all 
thinking for the survivor. 

Up Broadway he found much to keep  things which 
he garnered in the up-caught hem of his bearskin, things 
of all kinds and uses. He found a clay pipe  all the 
wooden ones had vanished from the shop  and a glass 
jar of tobacco. 

These he took as priceless treasures. More jars of 
edibles he discovered, also a stock of rare wines. Coffee 
and salt he came upx>n. In the ruins of the little French 




62 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

brass-ware shop, opposite the Flatiron, he made a rich 
haul of cups and plates and a still serviceable lamp. 

Strangely enough, it still had oil in it. The fluid hermetically sealed in, had not been able to evaporate. 

At last, when the lengthening shadows in Madison Forest 
warned him that day was ending, he betook himself, heavy 
laden, once more back past the spring, and so through the 
path which already was beginning to be visible back to 
the shelter of the Metropolitan. 

"Now for a great surprise for the girl!" thought he, 
laboriously toiling up the stair with his burden: "What 
will she say, I wonder, when she sees all these housekeeping treasures?" Eagerly he hastened. 

But before he had reached the third story he heard a 
cry from above. Then a spatter of revolver-shots punctured the air. 

He stopped, listening in alarm. 

" Beatrice I Oh, Beatrice I " he hailed, his voice falling 
flat and stifled in those ruinous passages. 

Another shot. 

" Answer ! " panted Stem. " What's the matter nowf ' 

Hastily he put down his burden, and, spurred by a great 
terror, bounded up the broken stairs. 

Into their little shelter, their home, he ran, calling her 
name. 

No reply came ! 

Stem stopped short, his face a livid gray. 

" Merciful Heaven ! " stammered he. 

The girl was gone! 



CHAPTER XI 



A THOUSAND YEARS I 



Sickened with a numbing anguish of fear such as in all 
Us life he had never known. Stem stood there a moment, 
motionless and lost. 

Then he turned. Out into the hall he ran, and his voice, 
re-echoing wildly, rang through those long-deiserted aisles. 

All at once he heard a laugh behind him  a hail. 

He wheeled about, trembling and spent Out his arms 
went, in eager greeting. For the girl, laughing and flushed, 
and very beautiful, was coming down the stair at the end 
of the hall. 

Never had the engineer beheld a sight so wonderful to 
him as this woman, clad in the Bengal robe ; this girl who 
smiled and ran to meet him. 

What? Were you frightened?" she asked, growing 
suddenly serious, as he stood there speechless and pale. 
" Why  what could happen to me here ? " 

His only answer was to take her in his arms and whisper 
her name. But she struggled to be free. 

" Don't ! you mustn't ! " she exclaimed. " I didn't mean 
to alarm you. Didn't even know you were here ! " 

I heard the shots  I called  you didn't answer. 



it 



if 



" You found me gone? I didn't hear you. It was nothing, after all. Nothing  much ! " 
He led her back into the room. 

What happened ? Tell me ! " 

It was really too absurd ! " 

63 



 



44 




64 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

"What was it?" 

" Only this/' and she laughed again. " I was getting 
supper ready, as you see," with a nod at their provision 
laid out upon the clean-brushed floor. " When  " 

"Yes?" 

" Why, a blundering great hawk swooped in through the 
window there, circled around, pounced on the last of our 
beef and tried to fly away with it." 

Stem heaved a sigh of relief. " So that was all ? " 
asked he. " But the shots ? And your absence ? " 

" I struck at him. He showed fight. I blocked the 
window. He was determined to get away with the food. 
I was determined he shouldn't. So I snatched the revolver 
and opened fire." 

"And then?" 

" That confused him. He flapped out into the hall. I 
chased him. Away up the stairs he circled. I shot again. 
Then I pursued. Went up two stories. But he must have 
got away through some opening or other. Our beef's all 
gone I " And Beatrice looked very sober. 

" Never mind, I've got a lot more stuflF down-stairs. But 
tell me, did you wing him ? " 

" I'm afraid not," she admitted. " There's a feather or 
two on the stairs, though." 

" Good work ! " cried he laughing, his fear all swallowed 
in the joy of having found her again, safe and unhurt. 
"But please don't give me another such panic, will you? 
It's all right this time, however. 

" And now if you'll just wait here and not get fighting 
with any more wild creatiires, I'll go down and bring my 
latest finds. I like your pluck," he added slowly, gazing 
earnestly at her. 

"But I don't want you chasing things in this old shell 
of a building. No telling what crevice you might fall into 
or what accident might happen. Au revoir!' 

Her smile as he left her was inscrutable, but her eyes. 



A THOUSAND YEARS! 65 



strangely bright, folio 
more down the stairs. 



Broad strokes, a line here, one there, with much left to 
the imagining  such will serve best for the painting of a 
picture like this  a picture wherein every ordinary bond of 
human life, the nexus of man's society, is shattered. Where 
everything must strive to reconstruct itself from the dust. 
Where the future, if any such there may be, must rise from 
the aishes of a crumbling past. 

Broad strokes, for detailed ones would fill too vast a can 
vas. Impossible to describe a tenth of the activities of 
Beatrice and Stern the next four days. Even to make a 
list of their hard-won possessions would turn this chapter 
into a mere catalogue. 

So let these pass for the most part. Day by day the 
man, issuing forth sometimes alone, sometimes with Beatrice, labored like a Titan among the ruins of New York. 

Though more than ninety per cent, of the city's one-time 
wealth had long since vanished, and though all standards 
of worth had wholly changed, yet much remained to harvest 

Infinitudes of things, more or less damaged, they bore 
up to their shelter, up the stairs which here and there 
Stem had repaired with rough-hewn logs. 

For now he had an ax, found in that treasure-house of 
Carrier & Brown's, brought to a sharp edge on a wet, flat 
stone by the spring, and hafted with a sapling. 

This implement was of incredible use, and greatly enheartened the engineer. More valuable it was than a 
thousand tons of solid gold. 

The same store yielded also a well-preserved enameled 
water-pail and some smaller dishes of like ware, three more 
knives, quantities of nails, and some small tools; also the 
tremendous bonanza of a magazine rifle and a shotgun, both 




66 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

of which' Stern judged would come into shape by the application of oil and by careful tinkering. Of anununition, here 
and elsewhere, the engineer had no doubt he could unearth 
unlimited quantities. 

" With steel," he reflected, " and with my flint spearhead, I can make fire at any time. Wood is plenty, and 
there's lots of 'punk.' So the first step in reestablishing 
civilization is secure. With fire, ever)rthing else beccMnes 
possible. 

" After a while, perhaps, I can get arotmd to manufacturing matches again. But for the present my few ounces 
of phosphorus and the flint and steel will answer very 
well." 

Beatrice, like the true woman she was, addressed herself 
eagerly to the fascinating task of making a real home out 
of the barren desolation of the fifth floor oflices. Her 
splendid energy was no less than the engineer's. And very 
soon a comfortable air pervaded the place. 

Stem manufactured a broom for her by cutting willow 
withes and lashing them with hide strips onto a trimmed 
branch. Spiders and dust all vanished. A true housekeeping appearance set in. 

To supplement the supply of canned food that accumulated along one of the walls, Stern shot what game he 
could  squirrels, partridges and rabbits. 

Metal dishes, especially of solid gold, ravished from Fifth 
Avenue shops, took their place on the crude table he had 
fashioned with his ax. Not for esthetic eflFect did they 
now value gold, but merely because that metal had perfectly 
withstood the ravages of time. 

In the ruins of a magnificent store near Thirty-First 
Street, Stem found a vault burst open by frost and slow 
disintegration of the steel. 

Here something over a quart of loose diamonds, big and 
little, rough and cut, were lying in confusion all about. 
Stem took none of these. Their value now was no greater 
than that of any pebble. 




A THOUSAND YEARS ! , 67 

But he chose a massive clasp of gold for Beatrice for 
that could serve to fasten her robe. And in addition he 
gathered up a few rings and one-time costly jewels which 
could be worn. For the girl, after all, was one of Eves 
daughters. 

Bit by bit he accumulated many necessary articles, including some tooth-brushes which he found sealed in glass hottl and a variety of gold toilet articles. Use was his first 
consideration now. Beauty came far behind. 

In the comer of their rooms, after a time, stood a fair 
variety of tools, some already serviceable, others waiting to 
be polished, ground and hafted, and in some cases retempered. Two rough chairs made their appearance. 

The north room, used only for cooking, became their 
forge and oven all in one. For here, close to a window 
where the smoke could drift out, Stern built a circular 
stone fireplace. 

And here Beatrice presided over her copper casseroles 
and saucepans from the little shop on Broadway. Here, 
too. Stem planned to construct a pair of skin bellows, 
and presently to set up the altars of Vulcan and of Tubal 
Cain once more. 

Both of them "thanked whatever gods there be" that 
the girl was a good cook. She amazed the engineer by the 
variety of dishes she managed to concoct from the canned 
goods, the game that Stem shot, and fresh dandelk>n greens 
dug near tihe spring. These edibles, with the blackest of 
black coffee, soon had them in fine fettle. 

" I certainly have begun to put on weight," laughed the 
man after dinner on the fourth day, as he lighted his fragrant pipe with a roll of blazing birch-bark. 

" My bearskin is getting tight. You'll have to let it out 
for me, or else stop such magic in the kitchen ! " 

She smiled back at him, sitting there at ease in the sundune by the window, sipping her coffee out of a gold cup 
with a solid gold spoon. 
 Stem, feding the May breeze upon his face, hearing the 




68 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

bird-songs in the forest depths, f eh a well-being, a glow of 
health and joy such as he had never in his whole life known 
 the health of outdoor labor and sound sleep and perfect 
digestion, the joy of accomplishment and of the girl's near 
presence. 

" I suppose we do live pretty well," she answered, surveying the jemnants of the feast. " Potted tongue and 
peas, fried squirrel, partridge and coffee ought to satisfy 
anybody. But still" 
. "What is it?" 

" I would like some buttered toast and some cream for 
my coflFee, and some sugar." 

Stem laughed heartily. 

" You don't want much ! " he exclaimed, vastly amused, 
the while he blew a cloud of Latakia smoke. " Well, you 
be patient, and everything will come, in time. 

"You mustn't expect me to do magic. On the fourth 
day you don't imagine I've had time enough to round up 
the ten thousandth descendant of the erstwhile cow, do 
you? 

"Or grow cane and make sugar? Or find grain for 
seed, clear some land, plow, harrow, plant, hoe, reap, winnow, grind and bolt and present you with a bag of prime 
flour ? Now really ? " 

She pouted at his raillery. For a moment there was 
silence, while he drew at his pipe. At the girl he looked 
a little while. Then, his eyes a bit far-away, he remarked 
in a tone he tried to render casual : 

" By the way, Beatrice, it occurs to me that we're doing 
rather well for old people  very old." 

She looked up with a startled glance. 

" Veryf " she exclaimed. " You know how old then ? " 

"Very, indeed!" he answered. "Yes, I've got some 
sort of an idea about it. I hope it won't alarm you when 
you know." 

"Why  how so? Alarm me?" she queried with a 
strange expression. 




A THOUSAND YEARS! 69 

"Yes, because, you see, it's rather a long time since we 
went to sleep. Quite so. You see, I've been doing a little 
calculating, off and on, at odd times. Been putting two 
and two together, as it were. 

"First, there was the matter of the dust in sheltered 
places, to guide me. The rate of deposition of what, in one 
or two spots, can't have been anything less than 'cosmic or 
star-dust, is fairly certain. 

" Then again, the rate of this present deterioration of 
stone and steel has furnished another index. And last 
night I had a 'ttle peek at the pole-star, through my telescope, while you were asleep. 

 The good old star has certainly shifted out of place a 
bit Furthermore, I've been observing certain evolutionary 
dianges in the animals and plants about us. Those have 
helped, too." 

" And  and what have you found out ? " asked she with 
tremulous interest. 

"Well, I think I've got the answer, more or less correctly. Of course it's only an approximate result, as we 
say in engineering. But the different items check up with 
some dree of consistency. 

" And I'm safe in believing I'm within at least a hundred 
years of the date one way or the other. Not a bad factor 
of safety, that, with my limited means of working." 

The girl's eyes widened. From her hand fell the empty 
gold cup ; it rolled away across the clean-swept floor. 

" What ? " cried she. " You've got it, within a hundred 
years! Why, then  you mean it's more than a hundred? " 
Indulgently the engineer smiled. 

"G)me, now," he coaxed. "Just guess, for instance, 
how old you really are  and growing younger every day? 
How old?" 

"Two hundred maybe? Oh surely not as old as that! 
Ifs horrible to think of ! " 

 Listen," bade he. " If I count your twenty-four years, 
irfien you went to sleep, you're now  ' 




o DARKNESS AND DAWN 



"What?' 

" You're now at the very minimum calculation, just about 
one thousand and twenty- four ! Some age, that, eh ? " 

Then, as she stared at him wide-eyed he added with a 
smile. 

" No disputing that fact, no dodging it. The thing's 
as certain as that you're now the most beautiful woman in 
the whole wide world ! " 




CHAPTER XII 



DRAWING TOGETHER 



Days passed, busy days, full of hard labor and achievement, 
rich in experience and learning, in happiness, in dreams of 
what the future might yet bring. 

Beatrice made and finished a considerable wardrobe of 
garments for them both. These, when the fur had been 
clipped close with the scissors, were not oppressively warm, 
and, even though on some days a bit uncomfortable, the 
man and woman tolerated them because they haa ho others. 

Plenty of bathing and good food put them in splendid 
physical condition, to which their active exercise contributed much. And thus, judging partly by the state of 
the foliage, partly by the height of the sun, which Stem 
determined with considerable accuracy by means of a simple, home-made quadrant  they knew mid-May was past 
and June was drawing near. 

The housekeeping by no means took up all the girl's time. 
Often she went out with him on what he called his " pirating expeditions," that now sometimes led them as far afield 
as the sad ruins of the wharves and piers, or to the stark 
desolation and wreckage of lower Broadway and the onetime busy hives of newspaperdom, or up to Central Park 
or to the great remains of the two railroad terminals. 

These two places, the former tide-gates of the city's life, 
impressed Stern most painfully of anything. The disintegrated tracks, the jumbled remains of locomotives and 
luxurious Pullmans with weeds growing rank upon them, 
the sunlight beating down through the caved-in roof of the 
Pennsylvania station " concourse," where millions of human 

i 




2 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

beings once had trod in all the haste of men's paltry, futile 
affairs, filled him with melancholy, and he was glad to get 
away again leaving the place to the jungle, the birds and 
beasts that now laid claim to it. 

"Sic transit gloria mundi!" he murmured, as with sad 
eyes he mused upon the downtumbled columns along the 
fagade, the overgrown entrance-way, the cracked and falling arches and architraves. "And this, they said, was 
builded for all time ! " 

It was on one of these expeditions that the engineer found 
and pocketed  unknown to Beatrice  another disconcerting 
relic. 

This was a bone, broken and splintered, and of no very 
great age, gnawed with perfectly visible tooth-marks. He 
picked it up, by chance, near the west side of the ruins of 
the old City Hall. 

Stem recognized the manner in which the bone had been 
cracked open with a stone to let the marrow be sucked out. 
The sight of this gruesome relic revived all his fears, tenfold more acutely than ever, and filled him with a sense of 
vague, impending evil, of peril deadly to them both. 

This was the more keen, because the engineer knew at 
a glance that the bone was the upper end of a human femur 
 human, or, at the very least, belonging to some highly 
anthropoid animal. And of apes or gorillas he had, as 
yet, found no trace in the forests of Manhattan. 

Long he mused over his find. But not a single word 
did he ever say to Beatrice concerning it or the flint spearpoint. Only he kept his eyes and ears well open for other 
bits of corroborative evidence. 

And he never ventured a foot from the building unless 
his rifle and revolver were with him, their magazines full 
of high-power shells. 

The girl always went armed, too, and soqn grew to be 
such an expert shot that she could drop a squirrel from the 
tip of a fir, or wing a heron in full flight. 

Once her quick eyes spied a deer in the tangles of the 



DRAWING TOGETHER 73 

one-time Gratnercy Park, now no longer neatly hedged 
with iron palings, but spread in wild confusion that joined 
the riot of growth beyond. 

On the instant she fired, wounding the creature. 

Stem's shot, echoing hers, missed. Already the deer was 
away, out of range through the forest. With some difficulty they pursued down a glenlike strip of woods that 
must have once been Irving Place. 

Two hundred yards south of the park they sighted the 
animal again. And the girl with a single shot sent it 
crashii to earth. 

' Bravo, Diana ! " hurrahed Stem, running forward with 
enthusiasm. The " deer fever " was on him, as strong as 
in his old days in the Hudson Bay country. Hot was the 
pleasure of the kill when that meant food. As he ran he 
jerked his knife from the skin sheath the girl had made for 
hmi. 

Thus they had fresh venison to their heart's content  
venison broiled over white-hot coals in the fireplace, juicy 
and savory-sweet beyond all telling. 

A good deal of the meat they smoked and salted down 
for future use. Stern undertook to tan the hide with 
strips of hemlock bark laid in a water pit dug near the 
sprii. He added also some oak-bark, nut-galls and a good 
quantity of young sumac shoots. 

" I guess that ought to hit the mark if anything will," 
remarked he, as he immersed the skin and weighted it 
down with rocks. 

 It's like the old ' shotgun ' prescriptions of our extinct 
doctors  a little of everything, bound to do the trick, one 
way or another." 

'The great variety of labors now imposed upon him bn 
to try his ingenuity to the full. In spite of all his wealth 
of practical knowledge and his scientific skill, he was astounded at the huge demands of even the simplest human 
life. 

The girl and he now faced these, without the social coop


t 




74 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

eration which they had formerly taken entirely for granted, 
and the change of conditions had hegixn to alter Stem's 
concepts of almost everything. 

He was already beginning to realize how true the old 
saying was : " One man is no man I " and how the world 
had been the world merely because of the interrelations, the 
interdependencies of human beings in vast numbers. 

He was commencing to get a glimpse of the vanished 
social problems that had enmeshed civilization, in their 
true light, now that all he confronted and had to struggle 
with was the unintelligent and overbearing dominance of 
nature. 

All this was of huge value to the engineer. And the 
strong individualism (essentially anarchistic) on which he 
had prided himself a thousand years ago, was now beginning to receive some mortal blows, even during these first 
days of the new, solitary, unsocialized life. 

But neither he nor the girl had very much time for introspective thought. Each moment brought its immediate task, 
and every day seemed busier than the last had been. 

At meals, however, or at evening, as they sat together 
by the light of their lamp in the now homelike offices. Stem 
and Beatrice found pleasure in a little random speculation. 
Often they discussed the catastrophe and their own escape; 

Stem brought to mind some of Professor Raoul Pictet's 
experiments with animals, in which the Frenchman had 
suspended animation for long periods by sudden freezing. 
This method seemed to answer, in a way, the girl's earlier 
questions as to how they had escaped death in the many 
long winters since they had gone to sleep. 

Again, they tried to imagine the scenes just following the 
catastrophe, the horror of that long-past day, and the slow, 
irrevocable decay of all the monuments of the human race. 

Often they talked till past midnight, by the glow of their 
stone fireplace, and many were the aspects of the case that 
they developed. These hours seemed to Stem the happiest 
of his life. 




DRAWING TOGETHER 75 

For the rapprochement between this beautiful wcMnan 
and himself at such times became very close and fascinatiniy intimate, and Stem felt, little by little, that the love 
which now was growing deep within his heart for her was 
not without its answer in her own. 

But for the present the man restrained himself and spoke 
no overt word. For that, he imderstood, would immediately have put all things on a different basis  and there 
was urgent work still waiting to be done. 

" There's no doubt in my mind," said he one day as they 
sat talking, " that you and I are absolutely the last human 
beings  civilized I mean  lef t alive anywhere in the world. 

" If anybody else had been spared, whether in Chicago 
or San Francisco, in London, Paris or Hong-Kong, they'd 
have made some determined effort before now to get in 
touch with New York. This, the prime center of the financial and industrial world, would have been their first objective point." 

" But suppose," asked she, " there were others, just a few 
here or there, and they'd only recently waked up, like ourselves. G>uld they have succeeded in making themselves 
known to us so soon ? " 

He shook a dubious head. 

" There may be some one else, somewhere," he answered 
slowly, " but there's nobody else in this part of the world, 
anyhow. Nobody in this particular Eden but just you and 
me. To all intents and purposes I'm Adam. And you  
well, you're Eve! But the tree? We haven't found that 
yet." 

She gave him a quick, startled glance, then let her head 
fall, so that he could not see her eyes. But up over her 
neck, her cheek and even to her temples, where the lustrous 
masses of hair fell away, he saw a tide of color mount 

And for a little space the man forgot to smoke. At her 
he gazed, a strange gleam in his eyes. 

And no word passed between them for a while. But 
their thoughts  ? 




CHAPTER XIII 



THE GRAT EXPERIMENT 



The idea that there might possibly be others Of their kind 
in far-distant parts of the earth worked strongly on the 
mind of the girl. Next day she broached the subject again 
to her companion. 

" Suppose," theorized she, " there might be a few score 
of others, maybe a few hundred, scattered here and there? 
They might awaken one by one, only to die, if less favorably situated than we happen to be. Perhaps thousands 
may have slept, like us, only to wake up to starvation I " 

' There's no telling, of course," he answered seriously. 
 Undoubtedly that may be very possible. Some may have 
escaped the great death, on high altitudes  on the EiflFel 
,Tower, for instance, or on certain mountains or lofty plateaus. The most we can do for the moment is just to 
guess at probabilities. And  ' 

"But if there are people elsewhere," she interrupted 
eagerly, her eyes glowing with hope, " isn't there any way to 
get in touch with them? Why should we expect them to 
seek us out? Why don't we hunt? Suppose only one or 
two in each country should have survived ; if we could get 
them all together again in a single colony don't you see ? " 

" You mean the diflFerent languages and arts and all the 
rest might still be preserved ? The colony might grow and 
flourish, and mankind again take possession of the earth 
and conquer it, in a few decades? Yes, of course. But 
even though there shouldn't be anybody else, there's no 
cause for despair. Of that, however, we won't speak 



now." 



76 



THE GREAT EXPERIMENT  

 Bat why don't we try to find out about it ? '' she persisted. " If there were only the remotest chance  " 

" By Jove, I vM try it I " exclaimed the engineer, fired 
with a new thought, a fresh ambition. '' How ? I don't 
know just yet, but I'll see. There'll be a way, right enougbi 
if I can only think it out 1 " 

That afternoon he made his way down Broadway, past 
the copper-shop, to the remains of the telegraph office opposite the Flatiron.  

Into it he penetrated with some difficulty. A mournful 
sight it ras, this one-time busy ganglion of the nation's 
nerve-system. Benches and counters were quite gone, 
instruments corroded past recognition, everything in hideous 
disorder. 

But in a rear room Stem found a large quantity of copper wire. The wooden dnuns on which it had been wound 
were gone; the insulation had vanished, but the coils of 
wire still remained. 

"Fine I" said the explorer, gathering together several 
coils. " Now when I get this over to the Metropolitan, I 
think the first step toward success will have been taken." 

By nightfall he had accumulated enough wire for his 
tentative experiments. Next day he and the girl explored 
the remains of the old wireless station on the roof of the 
building, overlooking Madison Avenue. 

They reached the roof by climbing out of a window on 
the east side of the tower and descending a fifteen-foot 
ladder that Stem had built for the purpose out of rough 
branches. 

" You see it's fairly intact as yet," remarked the engfineer, 
gesturing at the broad expanse. " Only, falling stones have 
made holes here and there. See how they yawn down into 
the rooms below I Well, come cm, follow me. I'll tap , 
with the ax, and if the roof holds me you'll be safe." 

Thus, after a little while, they found a secure path to 
the littie station. 

This diminutive building, fortunately constructed of con



78 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Crete, still stood almost unharmed. Into it they penetrated 
through the crumbling door. The winds of heaven had 
centuries ago swept away all trace of the ashes of the 
operator. 

But there still stood the apparatus, rusted and sagging 
and disordered, yet to Stem's practised eye showing signs 
of promise. An hour's careful overhauling convinced the 
engineer that something might yet be accomplished. 

And thus they set to work in earnest. 

First, with the girl's help, he strung his copper-wire 
antennae from the tiled platform of the tower to the roof 
of the wireless station. Rough work this was, but answering the purpose as well as though of the utmost finish.  

He connected up the repaired apparatus with these antennae, and made sure all was well. Then he dropped the 
wires over the side of the building to connect with one of 
the dynamos in the sub-basement. 

All this took two and a half days of severe labor, in intervals of food-getting, cooking and household tasks. At last, 
when it was done  

" Now for some power ! " exclaimed the engineer. And 
with his lamp he went down to inspect the d3mamos again 
and to assure himself that his belief was correct, his faith 
that one or two of them could be put into running order. 

Three of the machines gave little promise, for water had 
dripped in on them and they were rusted beyond any apparent rehabilitation. The fourth, standing nearest Twenty-Third Street, had by some freak of chance been protected 
by a canvas cover. 

This cover was now only a mass of rotten rags, but it 
had at least safeguarded the machine for so long that no 
very serious deterioration had set in. 

Stern worked the better part of a week with such tools 
as he could find or make  he had to forge a wrench for the 
largest nuts  " taking down " the dynamo, oiling, filing, 
polishing and repairing it, part by part. 

The commutator was in bad shape and the brushes terrl



THE GREAT EXPERIMENT 79 

bly corroded. But he tinkered and patched, hammered and 
heated and filed away, and at last putting the machine together again with terrible exertion, decided that it would 
run. 

" Steam now ! " was his next watchword, when he had 
wired the dynamo to connect with the station on the roof. 
And this was on the eighth day since he had begun his labor. 

An examination of the boiler-room, which he reached 
by moving a ton of fallen stone-work from the doorway 
into the dynamo-room, encouraged him still further. As 
he penetrated into this place, feeble-shining lamp held on 
high, eyes eager to behold the prospect, he knew that success was not far away. 

Down in these depths, almost as in the interior of the 
great Pyramid of Gizeh  though the place smelled dank 
and close and stifling  time seemed to have lost much of its 
destructive power. He chose one boiler that looked sound, 
and began looking for coal. 

Of this he found a plentiful supply, well-preserved, in 
the bunkers. All one afternoon he labored, wheeling it in 
a steel barrow and dumping it in front of the furnace. 

Where the smoke-stack led to and what condition it was 
m he knew not. He could not tell where the gases of combustion would escape to; but this he decided to leave to 
chance. 

He grimaced at sight of the rusted flues and the steampipes connecting with the dynamo-room  pipes now denuded of their asbestos packing and leaky at several joints. 

A strange, gnome-like picture he presented as he poked 
and pried in those dim regions, by the dim rays of the 
lamp. Spiders, roaches and a great gray rat or two were 
his only companions  those, and hope. 

 I don't know but Tm a fool to try and carry this thing 
oat," said he, dubiously surveying the pipe. " I'm liable 
to start something here that I can't stop. Water-glasses 
leaky, gauges plugged up, safety-valve rusted into its seat 
-Ac devil ! " 




8o DARKNESS AND DAWN 

But still he kept on. Something drove him inexorably 
forward. For he was an engineer  and an American. 

His next task was to fill the boiler. This he had to do 
by bringing water, two pails at a time from the spring. It 
took him three days. 

Thus, after eleven days of heart-breaking lonely toil in 
that grimy dungeon, hampered for lack of tools, working 
with rotten materials, naked and sweaty, grimed, spent, profane, exhausted, everything was ready for the experiment 
 the strangest, surely, in the annals of the human race. 

He lighted up the furnace with dry wood, then stoked it 
full of coal. After an hour and a half his heart thrilled 
with mingled fear and exultation at sight of the steam, first 
white, then blue and thin, that began to hiss from the, leaks 
in the long pipe. 

" No way to estimate pressure, or anything " remarked 
he. " It's bull luck whether I go to hell or not ! " And 
he stood back from the blinding glare of the furnace. 
With his naked arm he wiped the sweat from his streaming 
forehead. 

" Bull luck ! " repeated he. " But by the Almighty, I'll 
send that Morse, or bust ! " 



". I 



CHAPTER XIV 

THE MOVING LIGHTS 

Panting with exhaustion and excitement, Stern made his 
way back to the engine-room. It was a strangely critical 
moment when he seized the corroded throttle-wheel to 
start the dynamo. The wheel stuck, and would not budge. 

Stem, with a curse of sheer exasperation, snatched up his 
kmg spanner, shoved it through the spokes, and wrenched. 

Groaning, the wheel gave way. It turned. The engineer 
hauled again. 

" Go on ! " shouted the man. " Start I Move ! " 

With a hissing plaint, as though rebellious against this 
awakening after its age-long sleep, the engine creaked into 
motion. 

In spite of all Stem's oiling, every journal and bearing 
squealed in anguish. A rickety tremble possessed the engine as it gained speed. The dynamo began to hum with 
wild, strange protests of racked metal. The ancient " drive " 
of tarred hemp strained and quivered, but held. 

And like the one-hoss shay about to collapse, the whole 
fabric of the resuscitated plant, leaking at a score of joints, 
creaking, whistling, shaking, voicing a hundred agonized 
mechanic woes, revived in a grotesque, absurd and shocking 
imitation of its one-time beauty and power. 

At sight of this ghastly resurrection, the engfineer (whose 
whole life had been passed in the love and service of machinery) felt a strange and sad emotion. 

He sat down, exhausted, on the floor. In his hand the 
lamp trembled. Yet, all covered with sweat and dirt and 

8i 




82 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

rust as he was, this moment of triumph was one of the 
sweetest he had ever known. 

He realized that this was now no time for inaction. Much 
yet remained to be done. So up he got again, and set to 
work. 

First he made sure the dynamo was running with no 
serious defect and that his wiring had been made properly. Then he heaped the furnace full of coal, and closed 
the door, leaving only enough draft to insure a fairly steady 
heat for an hour or so. 

This done, he toiled back up to where Beatrice was eagerly 
awaiting him in the little wireless station on the roof. 

In he staggered, all but spent. Panting for breath, wildeyed, his coal-blackened arms stretching out from the 
whiteness of the bear-skin, he made a singular picture. 

" It's going ! " he exclaimed. " I've got current  it's good 
for a while, anyhow. Now  now for the test ! " 

For a moment he leaned heavily against the concrete bench 
to which the apparatus was clamped. Already the day had 
drawn close to its end. The glow of evening had bn to 
fade a trifle, along the distant skyline; and beyond the 
Palisades a dull purple pall was settling down. 

By the dim light that filtered through the doorway, Beatrice looked at his deep-lined, bearded face, now reeking 
with sweat and grimed with dust and coal. An ugly face  : 
but not to her. For through that mask she read the dominance, the driving force, the courage of this versatile, unconquerable man. 

" Well," suddenly laughed Stem, with a strange accent 
in his voice, " well then, here goes for the operator in the 
Eiflfel Tower, eh?" 

Again he glanced keenly, in the failing light, at the apparatus there before him. 

" She'll do, I guess," judged he, slipping on the rusted 
head-receiver. He laid his hand upon the key and tried a 
few tentative dots and dashes. 

Breathless, the girl watched, daring no longer to qucs



THE MOVING LIGHTS 83 

tion him. In the dielectric, the green sparks and urts oi 
living flame began to crackle and to hiss like living spirits 
of an unknown power. 

Stem, feeling again harnessed to his touch the life-force 
of the world that once had been, exulted with a wild emotion. Yet, science-worshiper that he was, something of 
reverent awe tinged the keen triumph. A strange gleam 
dwdt within his eyes ; and through his lips the breath came 
quick as he flung his very being into this supreme experi
He reached for the ondometer. Carefully, slowly, he 
"tuned up' the wave-lengths; up, up to five thousand 
metres, then back again; he ran the whole gamut of the 
wireless scale. 

Out, ever out into the thickening gloom, across the void 
and vacancy of the dead world, he flung his lightnings in a 
wild appeal. His face grew hard and eager. 

"Anything? Any answer?" asked Beatrice, laying a 
hand upon his shoulder  a hand that trembled. 

He shook his head in negation. Again he switched the 
roaring current on ; again he hurled out into ether his cry 
of warning and distress, of hope, of invitation  the last 
lone call of man to man  of the last New Yorker to any 
other human being who, by the merest chance, might possibly hear him in the wreck of other cities, other lands. 
"S. O. S.!" crackled the green flame. "S. O. S. 
S, O. S.!" 

Thus came night, fully, as they waited, as they called 
and listened; as, together there in that tiny structure on 
the roof of the tremendous ruin, they swept the heavens 
and the earth with their wild call  in vain. 

Half an hour passed and still the engineer, grim as death, 
whirled the chained lightnings out and away. 

" Nothing yet ? " cried Beatrice at last, unable to keep 
silence any longer. " Are you quite sure you can't  " 

The question was not finished. 

For suddenly, far down below them, as though buried 




84 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

in the entrails of the earth, shuddered a stifled, booming 
roar. 

Through every rotten beam and fiber the vast wreck of 
the building vibrated. Some wall or other, somewhere, 
crumbled and went crashing down with a long, deep droning thunder that ended in a sliding diminuendo of noise. 

" The boiler ! ' shouted Stem. 

OflF he flung the head-piece. He leaped up ; he seized the 
girl. 

Out of the place he dragged her. She screamed as a 
huge weight from high aloft on the tower smashed bellowing through the roof, and with a shower of stones ripped 
its way down through the rubbish of the floors below, as 
easily as a bullet would pierce a newspaper. 

The crash sent them recoiling. The whole roof shook 
and trembled like honey-combed ice in a spring thaw. 

Down below, something rumbled, jarred, and came to 
rest. 

Both of them expected nothing but that the entire structure would collapse like a card-house and shatter down 
in ruins that would be their death. 

But though it swayed and quivered, as in the grasp of 
an earthquake, it held. 

Stem circled Beatrice with his arm. 

" Courage, now! Steady, now steady!" cried he. 

The grinding, the booming of down-hurled stones and 
walls died away ; the echoes ceased. A wind-whipped cloud 
of steam and smoke burst up, fanlike, beyond the edge of 
the roof. It bellied away, dim in the night, upon the stiflf 
northerly breeze. 

" Fire ? " ventured the girl. 

" No 1 Nothing to bum. But come, come ; let's get out 
o' this anyhow. There's nothing doing, any more. All 
through! Too much risk staying up here, now." 

Silent and dejected, they made their cautious way over 
the shaken roof. They walked with the greatest circum



THE MOVING LIGHTS 85 

spection, to avoid falling through some new hole or freshly 
opened crevasse. 

To Stern, especially, this accident was bitter. After 
nearly a fortnight's exhausting toil, the miserable fiasco was 
maddening. 

" Look ! " suddenly exclaimed the engineer, pointing. A 
vast, gaping canon of blackness opened at their very feet  
a yawning gash forty feet long and ten or twelve broad, 
with roughly jagged edges, leading down into unfathomed 
depths below. 

Stem gazed at it, puzzled, a moment, then peered up into 
the darkness above. 

" H-m ! " said he. " One of the half-ton hands of the 
big clock up there has just taken a drop, that's all. One 
drop too much, I call it. Now if we  or our rooms  had 
just happened to be underneath ? Some excitement, eh ? " 

They circled the opening and approached the tower wall. 
Stem picked up the rough ladder, which had been shaken 
down from its place, and once more set it to the window 
through which they were to enter. 

But even as Beatrice put her foot on the first rung, she 
started with a cry. Stem felt the grip of her trembling 
hand on his arm. 

" What is it ? " exclaimed he. 

"Look! Look!" 

Immobile with astonishment and fear, she stood pointing 
out and away, to westward, toward the Hudson. 

Stem's eyes followed her hand. 

He tried to cry out, but only stammered some broken, 
unintelligible thing. 

There, very far away and very small, yet clearly visible 
in swarms upon the inky-black expanse of waters, a hundrcdf a thousand little points of light were moving. 



L 




CHAPTER XV 

PORTENTS OF WAR 

Sterh and Beatrice stood there a few seconds at the foot 
of the ladder, speechless, utterly at a loss for any words 
to voice the turmoil of confused thoughts awakened by this 
inexplicable apparition. 

But all at once the girl, with a wordless cry, sank on 
her knees beside the vast looming bulk of the tower. She 
covered her face with both hands, and through her fingers 
the tears of joy began to flow. 

" Saved  oh, we're saved ! " cried she. " There are people  and they're coming for us ! " 

Stem glanced down at her, an inscrutable expression on 
his face, which had grown hard and set and ugly. His 
lips moved, as though he were saying something to himself ; 
but no sound escaped them. 

Then, quite suddenly, he laughed a mirthless laugh. To 
him vividly flashed back the memory of the flint spear-head 
and the gnawed leg-bone, cracked open so the marrow 
could be sucked out, all gashed with savage tooth-marks. 

A certain creepy sensation began to develop along his 
spine. He felt a prickling on the nape of his neck, as the 
hair stirred there. Instinctively he reached for his revolver. 

" So, then," he sneered at himself, " we're up against it, 
after all? And all my calculations about the world being 
swept clear, were so much punk? Well, well, this is interesting! Oh, I see it coming, all right  good and plenty  
and soon 1 " 

86 




 



PORTENTS OF WAR 87 

But the girl interrupted his ugly thoughts as he stood 
there straining his eyes out into the dark. 

" How splendid I How glorious 1 " cried she. ' Only 
to think that we're going to see people again I Can you 
imagine it?" 

" Hardly." 

"Why, what's the matter? You  speak as though you 
weren't  saved! " 

I didn't mean to. It's  just surprise, I guess.'' 
Come! Let's signal them with a fire from the tower 
top. ru help carry wood. Let's hurry down and run and 
meet them!" 

Highly excited, the girl had got to her feet again, and 
now, clutched the engineer's arm in burning eagerness. 

" Let's go ! Go at once ! This minute ! " 

But he restrained her. 

"You don't really think that would be quite prudent, 
do you? " asked he. " Not just yet? " 

"Why not?" 

"Why, can't you see? We  that is, there is no way 
to tell" 

"But they're coming to save us, can't you see? Somehow, somewhere, they must have caught that signal ! And 
shall we wait, and perhaps let them lose us, after all ? " 

"Certainly not. But first we  why, we ought to make 
quite sure, you understand. Sure that they  they're really 
civilized, you know." 

" But they must be, to have read the wireless ! " 

"Oh, you're counting on that, are you? Well, that's a 
big assumption. It won't do. No, we've got to go slow 
in this game. Got to wait. Wait, and see. Easy does it I " 

He tried to speak boldly and with nonchalance, but the 
girrs keen ear detected at least a little of the emotion that 
was troubling him. She kept a moment's silence, while the 
qnivering lights drew on and on, steadily, slowly, like a 
hoil of fireflies on the bosom of the night. 




88 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" Why don't you get the telescope, and see ? " she asked, 
at length. 

" No use. It isn't a night-glass. Couldn't see a thing." 

"But anyhow, those lights mean men, don't they?" 

" Naturally. But until we know what kind, we're better 
oflF right where we arc. I'm willing to welcome the coming 
guest, all right, if he's peaceful. Otherwise, it's powder and 
ball, hot water, stones and things for him ! " 

The girl stared a moment at the engineer, while this 
new idea took root within her brain. 

" You  you don't mean," she faltered at last, " that these 
may be  savages?" 

He started at the word. " What makes you think that? " 
he parried, striving to spare her all needless alarm. 

She pondered a moment, while the fire-dots, like a shoal 
of swimming stars, drew slowly nearer, nearer the Manhattan shore. 

" Tell me, are they savages ? " 

"How do / know?" 

" It's easy enough to see you've got an opinion about it. 
You think they're savages, don't you?" 

" I think it's very possible." 

"And if so what then?" 

"What then? Why, in case they aren't mighty nice 
and kind, there'll be a hot time in the old town, that's all. 
And somebody'll get hurt. It won't be usi " 

Beatrice asked no more, for a minute or two, but the 
engineer felt her fingers tighten on his arm. 

" I'm with you, till the end ! " she whispered. 

Another pregnant silence, while the nightwind stirred her 
hair and wafted the warm feminine perfume of her to his 
nostrils. Stern took a long, deep breath. A sort of dizziness crept over him, as from a glass of wine on an empty 
stomach. The Call of Woman strove to master him, but he 
repelled it. And, watching the creeping lights, he spoke; 
spoke to himself as much as to the girl ; spoke, lest he think 
too much. 



PORTENTS OF WAR 89 

"There's a chance, a mere possibility," said he, "that 
those boats, canoes, coracles or whatever they may be, belong 
to white people, far descendants of the few suppositious 
survivors of the cataclysm. There's some slight chance that 
these people may be civilized, or partly so. 

"Why they're coming across the Hudson, at this time 
o' night, with what object and to what place, we can't even 
guess. All we can do is wait, and watch and  be ready for 
anythii." 

 For anything 1 " she echoed. " You've seen me shoot ! 
You know ! " 

He took her hand, and pressed it. And silence fell again, 
as the long vigil started, there in the shadow of the tower, 
on the roof. 

For some quarter of an hour, neither spoke. Then at 
last, said Stem: 

" See, now I The lights seem to be winking out. The 
canoes must have come close in toward the shore of the 
island. They're being masked behind the trees. The people  whoever they are  will be landing directly now ! " 

" And then ? " 

" Wait and see ! " 

They resigned themselves to patience. The girl's breath 
came quickly, as she watched. Even the engineer felt his 
heart throb with accelerated haste. 

Now, far in the east, dim over the flat and dreary ruins 
of Long Island, the sky began to silver, through a thin 
veil of cirrus cloud. A pallid moon was rising. Far below, 
a breeze stirred the tree-fronds in Madison Forest. A bat 
staggered drunkenly about the tower, then reeled away into 
the gloom; and, high aloft, an owl uttered its melancholy 
plaint. 

Beatrice shuddered. 

" They'll be here pretty soon ! " whispered she, " Hadn't 
we better go down, and get our guns? In case  " 

"Time enough," he answered. "Wait a while.' 




90 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" Hark ! What's that ? " she exclaimed suddenly, holding 
her breath. 

OflF to northward, dull, mufHed, all but inaudible, they 
both heard a rhythmic pulsing, strangely barbaric. 

" Heavens ! " ejaculated Stem. " War-drums ! Tcwntoms, as I live ! " 



CHAPTER XVI 

THE GATHERING OF THE HORDES 



"Tom-toms? So they are savages?" exclaimed the girl, 
taking a quick breath. " But  what then?" 

" Don't just know, yet. It's a fact, though; they're certainly savages. Two tribes, one with torches, one with 
dnuns. Two different kinds, I guess. And they're coming 
in here to parley or fight or something. Regular powwow 
on hand. Trouble ahead, whichever side wins I" 

"For us?" 

" That depends. Maybe we'll be able to lie hidden, here, 
till this thing blows over, whatever it may be. If not, 
and if they cut off our water-supply, well  " 

He ended with a kind of growl. The sound gave Beatrice a strange sensation. She kept a moment's silence, 
then remarked: 

" They're up around Central Park now, the drimis are, 
don't you think so? How far do you make that?" 

 Close on to two miles. Come, let's be moving." 

In silence they climbed the shaky ladder, reached the 
tower stairs and descended the many stories to their dwelling. 

Here, the first thing Stem did was to strike a light, which 
he masked in a comer, behind a skin stretched like a screen 
from one wall to the other. By this illumination, very dim 
yet adequate, he minutely examined all their firearms. 

He loaded every one to capacity and made sure all were 
in working order. Then he satisfied himself that the supply of cartridges was ample. These he laid carefully along 
by the windows overlooking Afadison Forest, by the door 

91 




92 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

leading into the suite of offices, and by the stair-head that 
gave access to the fifth floor. 

Then he blew out the light again. 

"Two revolvers, one shotgun, and one rifle, all told," 
said he. "All magazine arms. I guess that'll hold them 
for a while, if it comes down to brass tacks ! How's your 
nerve, Beatrice?" 

" Never better ! " she whispered, from the dark. He saw 
the dim white blur that indicated her face, and it was very 
dear to him, all of a sudden  dearer, far, than he had ever 
realized. 

" Good little girl 1 " he exclaimed, giving her the rifle. 
A moment his hand pressed hers. Then with a quick intake 
of the breath, he strode over to the window and once more 
listened. She followed. 

" Much nearer, now ! " judged he. " Hear that, will 
you ? " 

Again they listened. 

Louder now the drums sounded, dull, ominous, pulsating 
like the hammering of a fever-pulse inside a sick man's 
skull. 'A dull, confused hum, a noise as of a swarming 
mass of bees, drifted down-wind. 

"Maybe they'll pass by?" whispered Beatrice. 

" It's Madison Forest they're aiming at ! " returned the 
engineer. " See there ! " 

He pointed to westward. 

There, far off along the forest-lane of Fourteenth Street, 
a sudden gleam of light flashed out among the trees, vanished, reappeared, was joined by two, ten, a hundred others. 
And now the whole approach to Madison Forest, by several streets, began to sparkle with these feux-follets, weaving and flickering tmsteadily toward the square. 

Here, there, everywhere through the dense masses of foliage, the watchers could already see a dim and moving mass, 
fitfully illtuninated by torches that now burned steady, now 
flared into red and smoky tourbillons of flame in the nightwind. 




GATHERING OF THE HORDES 93 

 Like monster glow-worms, crawling among the trees! " 
the girl exclaimed " We could mow them down, from 
here, already ! God grant we sha'n't have to fight ! " 

" S-h-h-h I Wait and see what's up I " 

N0W9 from the other horde, coming from the north, 
somids of warlike preparation were growing ever louder. 

With quicker beats the insistent twn-toms throbbed their 
rhythmic melancholy rune, hollow and dissonant. Then all 
at once the drums ceased ; and through the night air drifted 
a minor chant ; a wail, that rose, fell, died, and came again, 
lagging as many strange voices joined it. 

And from the square, below, a shrill, high-pitched, halfanimal cry responded. Creeping shudders chilled the flesh 
along the engineer's backbone. 

" What I need, now," thought he, " is about a hundred 
pomids of high-grade dynamite, or a gallon of nitroglycerin. Better still, a dozen capsules of my own invention, 
my ' Pulverite ! ' 

 I guess that would settle things mighty quick. It would 
be the joker in this game, all right ! Well, why not make 
some? With what chemicals I've got left, couldn't I work 
np a half-pint? Bottled in glass flasks, I guess it would 
turn the trick on 'em I " 

" Why, they look black ! " suddenly interrupted the girl. 
" See there and there ? " 

She pointed toward the spring. Stem saw moving shadows in the dark. Then, through an opening, he got a blurred 
impression of a hand, holding a torch. He saw a body, 
half-human. 

The glimpse vanished, but he had seen enough. 

" Black  yes, blue-black ! They seem so, anyhow. And 
 why, did you see the sise of them ? No bigger than apes ! 
Good Heaven!" 

Involuntarily he shuddered. For now, like a dream-horde 
of hideous creatures seen in a nightmare, the torch-bearers 
had spread all through the forest at the base of the Metropolitan. 




'94 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Away from the building out across by the spring and 
even to Fifth Avenue the mob extended, here thick, there 
thin, without order or coherence  sl shifting, murmuring, 
formless, seemingly planless ccHigeries of dull brutality. 

Here or there, where the swaying of the trees parted the 
branches a little, the wavering lights brought some fragment of the mass to view. 

No white thing showed anywhere. All was dark and 
vague. Indistinctly, waveringly as in a vision, dusky heads 
could be made out. There showed a naked arm, greasily 
shining for a second in the ruddy glow which now diffused 
itself through the whole wood. Here the watchers saw a 
glistening back ; again, an out-thrust leg, small and crooked, 
apelike and repulsive. 

And once again the engineer got a glimpse of a misshapen hand, a long, lean, hideous hand that clutched a 
spear. But, hardly seen, it vanished into obscurity once 
more. 

' Seems as though malformed human members, black 
and bestial, had been flung at random into a ghastly kaleidoscope, turned by a madman 1 ' whispered Stem. The girl 
answering nothing, peered out in fascinated horror. 

Up, up to the watchers rose a steady droning hum ; and 
from the northward, ever louder, ever clearer, came now 
the war-song of the attacking party. The dnuns began 
again, suddenly. A high-pitched, screaming laugh echoed 
and died among the woods beyond the ruins of Twentyeighth street. 

Still in through the western approaches of the square, 
more and more lights kept straggling. Thicker and still 
more thick grew the press below. Now the torch-glow was 
strong enough to cast its lurid reflections on the vacantstaring wrecks of windows and of walls, gaping like the 
shattered skulls of a civilization which was no more. To 
the nostrils of the man and woman upfloated an acrid, pitchy 
smelL And birds, dislodged from sleep, began to zigzag 
about, aimlessly, with frightened cries. One even dashed 




GATHERING OF THE HORDES 95 

against the building, dose at hand; and fell, a fluttering, 
broken thing, to earth. 

Stem, with a word of hot anger, fingered his revolver. 
But Beatrice laid her hand upon his arm. 

" Not yet ! " bged she. 

He glanced down at her, where she stood beside him at 
the empty embrasure of the window. The dim light from 
the vast and empty overarch of sky, powdered with a wcmder of stars, showed him the vague outline of her face. 
Wistful and pale she was, yet very brave. Through Stem 
welled <a sudden tenderness. 

He put his arm around her, and for a moment her head 
lay on his breast. 

But only a moment. 

For, all at once, a snarling cry rang through the wood ; 
and, with a northward surge of the torch-bearers, a confused tiunult of shrieks, howls, simian chatterings and dull 
blows, the battle joined between those two vague, strange 
farces down below in the black forest. 




CHAPTER XVII 



stern's resolve 



How long it lasted, what its meaning, its details, the 
watchers could not tell. Impossible, from that height and 
in that gloom, broken only by an occasional pale gleam of 
moonlight through the drifting cloud-rack, to judge the 
fortunes of this primitive war. 

They knew not the point at issue nor yet the tide of 
victory or loss. Only they knew that back and forth the 
torches flared, the war-drums boomed and rattled, the yelling, slaughtering, demoniac hordes surged in a swirl of 
bestial murder-lust. 

And so time passed, and fewer grew the dnmis, yet the 
torches flared on ; and, as the first gray dawn went fingering up the sky there came a break, a flight, a merciless pursuit. 

Dimly the man and woman, up aloft, saw things that 
ran and shrieked and were cut down  saw things, there 
in the forest, that died even as they killed, and mingled the 
howl of triumph with the bubbling gasp of dissolution. 

" Ugh I A beast war 1 " shuddered the engineer, at length, 
drawing Beatrice away from the window. "Come, it's 
getting light, again. It's too clear, now  come away ! " 

She yielded, waking as it were from the horrid fascination that had held her spell-bound. Down she sat on her bed 
of furs, covered her eyes with her hands, and for a while 
remained quite motionless. Stem watched her. And agaui 
his hand sought the revolver-butt. 

"I ought to have waded into that bunch, kmg ago, 

96 



STERN'S RESOLVE 97 

thouglit he, " We both ought to have. What it's all about, 
who could tell ? But it's an outrage against the night itself  
against the world, even dead though it be. If it hadn't 
been for wasting good ammunition for nothing  I" 

A curious, guttural whine, down there in the forest, 
attracted his attention. Over to the window he strode, and 
once again peered down. 

A change had come upon the scene, a sudden, radical 
change. No more the sounds of combat rose; but now a 
dull, condamant murmur as of victory and preparation for 
some ghastly rite. 

Already in the center of the wood, hard by the spring, 
a little fire had been lighted. Even as Stem looked, dim, 
moving figures heaped on wood. The engineer saw whiriing droves of sparks spiral upward; he saw dense smoke, 
followed by a larger flame. 

And, grouped around this, already some hundreds of the 
now paling torches cast their livid glare. 

Off to one side he could just distinguish what seemed to 
be a group engaged in some activity  but what this might 
be, he could not determine. Yet, all at once a scream o 
pain burst out, therefrcnn; and then a gasping cry that 
ended quickly and did not come again. 

Another shriek, and still a third ; and now into the leaping flames some dark, misshapen things were flung, and a 
great shout arose. 

Then rose, also, a shrill, singsong whine; and suddenly 
drums roared, now with a different cadence. 

" Hark ! " said the engineer. " The torchmen must have 
exterminated the other bunch, and got possession of the 
drums. They're using 'em, themselves  and badly 1 " 

By the firelight vague shapes came and went, their shadows grotesquely flung against the leafy screens. The figures 
quickened their paces and their gestures; then suddenly, 
with cries, flung themselves into wild activity. And sdl 
about the fire, Stem saw a wheeling, circling, eddying mob 
of black and frightful shapes. 



I 




98 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" The swine 1 " he breathed. " Wait wait till I make a 
pint Of two of Pulverite I " 

Even as he spoke, the concourse grew quiet with expectancy. A silence fell upon the forest. Something was 
being led forward toward the fire  something, for which 
the others all made way. 

The wind freshened. With it, increased the volume of 
smoke. Another frightened bird, cheeping forlornly, fluttered above the tree-tops. 

Then rose a cry, a shriek long-drawn and ghastly, that 
climbed till it broke in a bubbling, choking gasp. 

Came a sharp clicking sound, a quick scuffle, a grunt; 
then silence once more. 

And all at once the drums crashed ; and the dance began 
again, madder, more obscenely hideous than ever. 

"Voodoo!" gulped Stern. "Obeah-work! And  and 
the quicker I get my Pulverite to working, the better ! " 

Undecided no longer, determined now on a course of 
definite action without further delay, the engineer turned 
back into the room. Upon his forehead stood a cold and 
prickling sweat, of horror and disgust. But to his lips he 
forced a smile, as, in the half light of the red and windy 
dawn, he drew close to Beatrice. 

Then all at once, to his unspeakable relief, he saw the 
girl was sleeping. 

Utterly worn out, exhausted and spent with the long 
strain, the terrible fatigues of the past thirty-six hours, 
she had lain down and had dropped off to sleep. There she 
lay at full length. Very beautiful she looked, half seen 
in the morning gloom. One arm crossed her full bosom; 
the other pillowed her cheek. And, bending close, Stem 
>vatched her a long minute. 

With strange emotion he heard her even breathing; he 
caught the perfume of her warm, ripe womanhood. Never 
had she seemed to him so perfect, so infinitely to be loved, 
to be desired. 

And at thought of that beast-horde in the wood below. 




STERN'S RESOLVE 99 

at realization of what might be, if they two should chance 
to be discovered and made captive, his face went hard as 
iron. An tigly, savage look possessed him, and he clenched 
both fists. 

For a brief second he stooped still closer; he laid his 
lips soundlessly, gently upon her hair. And when again he 
stood up, the look in his eyes boded scant good to anything 
that might threaten the sleeping girl. 

" So, now to work!" said he. 

Into his own room he stepped quietly, his room where he 
had collected his various implements and chemicals. First 
of all he set out, on the floor, a two-quart copper tea-kettle; and beside this, choosing carefully, he ranged the necessary ingredients for a '' making " of his secret explosive. 

" Now, the wash-out water," said he, taking another 
laier dish. 

Over to the water-pail he walked. Then he stopped, 
suddenly, frowning a black and puzzled frown. 

' What ? " he exclaimed. " But there isn't a pint left, 
all together! H-m! Now then, here is a situation.' 

Hastily he recalled how the great labors of the previous 
day, the wireless experiments and all, had prevented him 
from going out to the spring to replenish his supply. Now, 
though he bitterly cursed himself for his neglect, that did 
no good. The fact remained, there was no water. 

" Scant pint, maybe ! " said he. " And I've got to have 
a gallon, at the very least. To say nothing of drink for two 
people! And the horde, there, camping round the spring. 
Je-rw-salem ! " 

Softly he whistled to himself; then, trying to solve this 
vital, unexpected problem, fell to pacing the floor. 

Day, slowly looming through the window, showed his 
features set and hard. Close at hand, the breath of morning winds stirred the treetops. But of the usual busy 
twitter and gossip of birds among the branches, now there 
was none. For down below there, in the forest, the ghoulish vampire revels still held sway. 




100 



DARKNESS AND DAWN 



Stern, at a loss, swore hotly under his breath. 

Then suddenly he found himself ; he came to a decision. 

"I'm going down," he vowed. "I'm going down, to 




CHAPTER XVIII 

THE SUPREME QUESTION 

Now that his course lay clear before him, the man felt an 
instant and a huge relief. Whatever the risks, the dangers, 
this adventuring was better than a mere inaction, besieged 
there in the tower by that ugly, misshapen horde. 

First of all. as he had done on the first morning of the 
awakening, when he had left the girl asleep, he wrote a 
brief communication to forestall any possible alarm on her 
part. This, scrawled with charcoal on a piece of smooth 
hide, ran: 

'' Have liad to go dowft to get water and lay of the land. 
Absolutely necessary. Don't be afraid. Am between you 
end them, well armed. Will lave you both the rifle and 
ihc shotgun. Stay here, and have no fear. Will come 
back as soon or possible, Allan." 

He laid this primitive letter where, on awakening, she 
could not fail to see it. Then, making sure again that all 
the arms were fully charged, he put the rifle and the gun 
close beside his " note," and saw to it Fhat his revolvers lay 
loosely and conveniently in the holsters she had made for 
him. 

One more reconnaissance he made at the front window. 
This done, he took the water-pail and set off quietly down 
the stairs. His feet were noiseless as a cat's. 

At every landing he stopped, listening intently. Down, 
ever down, story by story he crept. 

lOI 




102 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

To his chagrin  though he had half expected worse  he 
found that the boiler-explosion of the previous night bad 
really made the way impassible, from the third story downward. These lowest flights of steps had been so badly 
broken that now they gave no access to the arcade. 

All that remained of them was a jumbled mass of wreckage, below the gaping hole in the third-floor hallway. 

" That means," said Stem to himself, " I've got to find 
another way down. And quick, too ! " 

He set about the task with a will. Exploration of several lateral corridors resulted in nothing; but at last good 
fortune led him to stairs that had remained comparatively 
uninjured. And down these he stole, pail in one hand, 
revolver ready in the other, listening, creeping, every sense 
alert 

He fotmd himself, at length, in the shattered and dismembered wreckage of the once-famed " Marble Court." 
Fallen now were the carved and gilded pillars ; gone, save 
here or there for a fragment, the wondrous balustrade. One 
of the huge newel-posts at the bottom lay on the cracked 
' floor of marble squares ; the other, its metal chandelier still 
clinging to it, lolled drunkenly askew. 

But Stem had neither time nor inclination to observe 
these wof ul changes. Instead, he pressed still forward, and, 
after a certain time of effort, found himself in the arcade 
once more. 

Here the effects of the explosion were very marked. A 
ghastly hole opened into the subcellar below; masses of 
fallen ceiling blocked the way; and every pane of glass 
in the shop-fronts had shattered down. Smoke had blackened everything. Ashes and dirt, ad infinitum, completed 
the dreary picture, seen there by the still insufficient light of 
morning. 

But Stem cared nothing for all this. It even cheered him 
a trifle. 

" In case of a mix-up," thought he, " there couldn't be 
a better place for ambushing these infernal cannibals  



THE SUPREME QUESTION 103 

for mowing them down, wholesale  for sending them skyhooting U> Tophet, in bunches ! " 

And with a grim smile, he worked his way cautiously 
toward Madison Forest and the pine-tree gate. 

As he drew near, his care redoubled. His grip on the 
revohrer-butt tightened. 

" They mustn't see me  first! " said he to himself. 

Into a littered wreck of an office at the right of the exit 
he silently crept. Here, he knew, the outer wall of the 
building was deeply fissured. He hoped he might be able 
to find some peep-hole where, unseen, he could peer out 
on the bestial mob. 

He set his water-pail down, and on hands and knees, 
hardly breathing, taking infinite pains not to stir the loose 
rubbish on the floor, not even to crunch the fallen lumps 
of mortar, forward he crawled. 

Yes, there was a glimmer of light through the crack in 
the wall. Stern silently wormed in between a corroded 
steel I-beam and a cracked granite block, about the edges 
of which the small green tendrils of a vine had laid tfadr 
hold. 

This way, then that, he craned his neck. And all at once 
with a sharp breath, he grew rigid in horrified, eager attention 

" Great Ird ! " he whispered. " What? " 

Though, from the upper stories and by torch-light, he 
had already formed some notion of the Horde, he had in no 
wise been prepared for what he now was actually beholding 
through a screen of sumacs that grew along the wall outside. 

" Why why, this can't be real ! " thought he. " Itmust be some damned hallucination. Eh? Am I awake? 
What the deuce ! " 

Paling a little, his eyes staring, mouth agape, the engineer stayed there for a long minute unable to credit his own 
senses. For now he, he, the only white man living in the 
twenty-eighth century, was witnessing the strangest sight 




I04 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

that ever a civilized being had looked upon in the whole history of the world. 

No vision of DcQuincey, no drug-bom dream of Poe 
could equal it for grisly fascination. Frankenstein, de Maupassant's " Horla/' all the fantastic literary monsters of 
the past faded to tawdry, childish bogeys beside the actual 
observations of Stem, the engineer, the man of science 
and cold fact. 

"Why  what are these?" he asked himself, shuddering 
despite himself at the mere sight of what lay outside there 
in the forest. " What ? Men ? Animals ? Neither ! God 
help me, what  what are these things? " 




CHAPTER XIX 

THE UNKNOWN RACE 

An almost irresistible repugnce, a compelling aversion, 
more of the spirit than of the flesh, instantly seized the man 
at sight of even the few members of the Horde which lay 
within his view. 

Though he had been expecting to see something disgusting, something grotesque and horrible, his mind was wholly 
unprepared for the real hideousness of these creatures, now 
seen by the ever-strengthening light of day. 

And slowly, as he stared, the knowledge dawned on him 
that here was a monstrous problem to face, far greater 
and more urgent than he had foreseen; here were factors 
not yet understood; here, the product of forces till then 
not even dreamed of by his scientific mind. 

" I  I certainly did expect to find a small race," thought 
he. " Small, and possibly misshapen, the descendants, maybe, of a few survivors of the cataclysm. But this  !' 

And again, fascinated by the ghastly spectacle, he laid 
his eye to the chink in the wall, and looked. 

A tenuous fog still drifted slowly among the forest trees, 
veiling the deeper recesses. Yet, near at hand, within the 
limited segment of vision which the engineer commanded, 
everything could be made out with reasonable distinctness. 

Some of the Things (for so he mentally named them, 
knowing no better term) were squatting, lying or moving 
about, quite close at hand. The fire by the spring had now 
almost died down. It was evident that the revel had ceased, 
and that the Horde was settling down to rest  glutted, no 

105 




lo6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

doubt, with the raw and bleeding flesh of the conquered 
foe. 

Stem could easily have poked his pistol muzzle through 
the crack in the wall and shot down many of them. For 
an instant the temptation lay strong upon him to get rid 
of at least a dozen or a score; but prudence restrained his 
hand. 

" No use! " he told himself. " Nothing to be gained by 
that. But, once I get my proper chance at them  ! " 

And again, striving to observe them with the cool and 
calculating eye of science, he studied the shifting, confused 
picture out there before him. 

Then he realized that the feature which, above all else, 
struck him as ghastly and unnatural, was the color of the 
Things. 

" Not blacky not even brown," said he. " I thought so, 
last night, but daylight corrects the impression. Not red, 
either, or copper-colored. What color, then? For Heaven's sake, what?" 

He could hardly name it. Through the fog, it struck 
him as a dull slate-gray, almost a blue. He recalled that 
once he had seen a child's modeling-clay, much-used and 
very dirty, of the same shade, which certainly had no designation in the chromatic scale. Some of the Things were 
darker, some a trifle lighter  these, no doubt, the younger 
ones  but they all partook of this same characteristic tint. 
And the skin, moreover, looked dull and sickly, rather 
mottled and wholly repulsive, very like that of a Mexican 
dog. 

Like that dog's hide, too, it was sparsely overgrown with 
whitish bristles. Here or there, on the bodies of some of 
the larger Things, bulbous warts had formed, somewhat 
like those on a toad's back ; and on these warts the bristles 
clustered thickly. Stem saw the hair, on the neck of one 
of these creatures, crawl and rise like a jackal's, as a neigh 
bor jostled him ; and from the Thing's throat issued a dick 
ing gmnt of purely animal resentment. 



THE UNKNOWN RACE 107 

 Merciful Heavens ! What are they ? " wondered Stem, 
again, utterly baffled for any explanati(Hi. " What can they 
be?" 

Another, in the group close by, attracted his attention. 
It was lying on its side, asleep maybe, its back directly 
toward the engineer. Stem clearly saw the narrow 
shoulders and the thin, long arms, covered with that white 
bristling hair. 

One sprawling, spatulate, clawlike hand lay on the forest 
moss. The twisted little apelike legs, disproportionately 
short, were curled up ; the feet, prehensile and with a wellmarked thumb on each, twitched a little now and then. 
The head, enormously too big for the body, to which it 
was joined by a thin neck, seemed to be scantily covered 
with a fine, curling down, of a dirty yellowish drab color. 

" What a target I " thought the engineer. " At this distance, with my .38, I could drill it without half trying!" 

All at once, another of the group sat up, shoved away 
a burned-out torch, and yawned with a noisy, doglike whine. 
Stem got a quick yet definite glimpse of the sharp canine 
teeth; he saw that the Thing's fleshless lips and retreating 
diin were caked with dried blood. The tongue he saw 
was long and lithe and apparently rasped. 

Then the creature stood up, balancing on its absurd bandy 
legs, a spear in its hand  a flint-pointed spear of crude 
workmanship. 

At full sight of the face, Stern shrank for a moment. 

" I've known savages, as such," thought he. " I understand them. I know animals. TheyVe animals, that's all. 
But this creature  merciful Heaven!" 

And at the realization that it was neither beast nor man, 
the engineer's blood chilled within his veins. 

Yet he forced himself still to look and to observe, unseen. 
There was practically no forehead at all. The nose was 
but a formless lump of cartilage, the ears large and pendulous and hairy. Under heavy brow-ridges, the dull, lackluster eyes blinked stupidly, bloodshot and cruel. As the 




io8 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

mouth closed, Stem noted how the under incisors closed 
up over the upper lip, showing a gleam of dull yellowish 
ivory; a slaver dripped from the doglike comer of the 
mouth. 

Stem shivered, and drew back. 

He realized now that he was in the presence of an unknown semihuman type, different in all probability from 
any that had ever yet existed. It was less their bestiality 
that disgusted him, than their utter, hopeless, age-long 
degeneration from the man-standard. 

What race had they descended from ? He could not tell. 
He thought he could detect a trace of the Mongol in the 
region of the eye, in the cheek-bones and the general contour of what, by courtesy, might be called the face. There 
were indications, also, of the negroid type, still stronger. 
But the color  whence could that have come? And the 
general characteristics, were not these distinctly simian? 

Again he looked. And now one of the pot-bellied little 
horrors, shambling and bulbous-kneed, was scratching its 
warty, blue hide with its black claws as it trailed along 
through the forest It looked up, grinning and jabbering; 
Stern saw the teeth that should have been molars. With 
repulsion he noted that they were not flat-crowned, but sharp 
like a dog's. Through the blue lips they clearly showed. 

" Nothing herbivorous here," thought the scientist. ' All 
flesh- food of  who knows what sort ! " 

Quickly his mind ran over the outlines of the problem. 
He knew at once that these Things were lower than any 
human race ever recorded, far lower even that the famed 
Australian bushmen, who could not even count as high as 
five. Yet, strange and more than strange, they had the 
use of fire, of the tom-tom, of some sort of voodooism, of 
flint, of spears, and of a mde sort of tanning  witness the 
loin-clouts of hide which they all wore. 

"Worse than any troglodyte!" he told himself. "Far 
lower than De Quatrefage's Neanderthal man, to judge 
from the cephalic index  worse than that Java s)cull, the 




THE UNKNOWN RACE 109 

pkhicantkropus erectus, itself ! And I  am with my living 
eyes beholding them ! '' 

A slight sound, there behind him in the room, set his 
heart flailing madly. 

His hand froze to the butt of the automatic as he drew 
back from the cleft in the wall, and, staring, whirled about, 
ready to shoot on the second. 

Then he started back. His jaw dropped, his eyes widened 
and limply fell his arm. The pistol swung loosely at his 
side. 

"Youf' he soundlessly breathed, "Yov here f'' 

There at the door of the great empty room, magnificent 
in her tiger-skin, the Krag gripped in her supple hand, stood 
Beatrice. 




CHAPTER XX 

THE CURIOSITY OF EVE 

At him the girl peered eagerly, a second, as though to 
make quite sure he was not hurt in any way, to satisfy herself that he was safe and sound. 

Then with a little gasp of relief, she ran to him. Her 
sandled feet lightly disturbed the rubbish on the floor; 
dust rose. Stern checked her with an upraised hand. 

" Back I Back ! Go back, quick ! ' he formed the words 
of command on his trembling lips. The idea of this girl's 
close proximity to the beast-horde terrified him, for the 
moment. " Back! What on earth are you here for? ' 
" I  I woke up. I found you gone ! " she whispered. 
" Yes, but didn't you read my letter? This is no place 
for you ! " 

' I had to come I How could I stay up there, alone, when 

you  were  oh ! maybe in danger  maybe in need of me? " 

" Come ! " he commanded, in his perturbation heedless of 

the look she gave him. He took her hand. "Come, we 

must get out of this! It's too  too near the   

"The what? What is it, Allan? Tell me, have you 
seen them ? Do you know ? " 

Even excited as the engineer was, he realized that for 
the first time the girl had called him by his Christian name. 
Not even the perilous situation could stifle the thrill that 
ran through him at the sound of it. But all he answered 
was: 

"No, I don't know what to call them. Have no idea, 
as yet. I've seen them, yes; but what they are, Heaven 
knowsmaybe ! " 

no 




THE CURIOSITY OF EVE in 

'' Let me see, too ! " she pleaded eagerly. " Is it through 
that crack in the wall? Is that the place to look? " 

She moved toward it, her face blanched with excitement, 
eyes shining, lips parted. But Stem held her back. By 
the shoulder he took her. ' 

" No, no, little girl ! " he whispered. " You  you mustn't I 
Really must not, you know. It's too awful ! " 

Up at him she looked, knowing not what to think or say 
for a moment. Their eyes met, there in that wrecked and 
riven place, lighted by the dull, misty, morning gray. Then 
Stem spcke, for in her gaze abode questions unnumbered. 

" I'd much rather you wouldn't look out at them, not 
just yet," said he, speaking very low, fearful lest the murmur of his voice might penetrate the wall. "Just what 
they are, frankly, there's no telling." 

"You mean  ?" 

' Qne back into the arcade, where we'll be safer from 
discovery, and we can talk. Not here. Come ! " 

She obeyed. Together they retreated to the inner court. 

" You see," he commented, nodding at the empty water 
pail. " I haven't been to the spring yet. Not very likely 
to get there for a while, either, unless  well, unless something pretty radical happens. I think these chaps have 
settled down for a good long stay in their happy huntinggund, after the fight and the big feast. It's sort of a 
notion I've got, that this place, here, is some ancient, ceremonial ground of theirs." 

" You mean, on account of the tower? " 

He nodded. 

" Yes, if they've got any religious ideas at all, or rather 
superstitions, such would very likely center round the most 
conspicuous object in their world. Probably the spring is a 
rular voodoo hangout. The row, last night, must have 
been a sort of periodic argument to see who was going to 
rpa the show." 

 But," exclaimed the girl, in alarm  " but if they do 
ttiLj a while, what about us ? We simply must have water I " 



/ 




112 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" True enough. And, inasmuch as wc can't drink brine 
and don't know where there's any other spring, it lodes as 
though we'd either have to make up to these fellows or 
wade into them, doesn it ? But we'll get water safe enough, 
never fear. Just now, for the immediate present, I want 
to get my bearings a little, before going to work. They 
seem to be resting up, a bit, after their pleasant little soirie. 
Now, if they'd only all go to sleep, it'd be a walk-over! " 

The girl looked at him, very seriously. 

" You mustn't go out there alone, whatever happens ! " 
she exclaimed. " I just won't let you I But tell me," she 
questioned again, "how much have you really found out 
about them  whatever they are?" 

" Not much. They seem to be part of a nomadic race 
of half-htunan things, that's about all I can tell as yet. 
Perhaps all the white and yellow peoples perished utterly 
in the cataclysm, leaving only a few scattered blacks. You 
know blacks are immune to several germ-infections thaf 
destroy other races." 

Yes. And you mean  ?" 

It's quite possible these fellows are the far-distant and 
degenerate survivors of that other time." 

" So the whole world may have gone to pieces the way 
Liberia and Haiti and Santo Domingo once did, when white 
rule ceased ? " 

" Yes, only a million times more so. I see you know 
your history I If my hypothesis is correct, and only a few 
thousand blacks escaped, you can easily imagine what must . 
have happened." 

" For a while, maybe fifty or a hundred years, they may 
have kept some sort of dwindling civilization. Probably 
the English language for a while continued, in ever more 
and more corrupt forms. There may have been some pretense of maintaining the school system, railroads, steamship 
lines, newspapers and churches, banks and all the rott of 
that wonderfully complex system we once knew. But after 
a while  " 



 




THE CURIOSITY OF EVE 113 

'Yes? What thenf" 

"Why, the whole false shell crumbled, that's all. . It 
must have I History shows it It didn't take a hundred 
years after Toussaint L'Ouverture and Dessalines, in Haiti, 
for the blacks to shuck off French civilization and go back 
to grass huts and human sacrifice  to make another little 
Central Africa out of it, in the backwoods districts, at any 
fate. And we  have had a thousand, Beatrice, since the 
white man died i " 

She thought a moment, and shook her head. 

"What a story," she murmured, "what an incredible, 
horribly fascinating story that would make, if it could ever 
be known, or written I Think of the ebb-tide of everything ! 
Railroads abandoned and falling to pieces, cities crumbling, 
ships no longer sailing, language and arts and letters forgotten, agriculture shrinking back to a few patches of com 
and potatoes, and then to nothing at all, everything changing, dying, stopping  and the ever-increasing yet degenerating people leaving the city ruins, which they could not rebuild  taking to the fields, the forests, the mountains  
going down, down, back toward the primeval state, down 
through barbarism, through savagery, to  what ? " 

" To what we see I " answered the engineer, bitterly. 
" To animals, retaining by ghastly mockery some use of 
fire and of tools. All this, according to one theory." 

" Is there another? " she asked eagerly. 

" Yes, and I wish we had the shade of Darwin, of Haeckel or of Clodd here with us to help us work it out ! " 

" How do you imagine it ? " 

" Why, like this. Maybe, after all, even the entire black 
race was swept out along with the others, too. Perhaps you 
and I were really the only two human beings left alive in 
the world." 

" Yes, but in that case, how  ? " 

"How came they here? Listen! May they not be the 
product of some entirely different process of development? 
May not some animal stock, under changed environment. 



L,



114 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

have easily evolved them ? May not some other semi-human 
or near-human race be now in process of arising, here on 
earthy eventually to conquer and subdue it all again?" 

For a moment she made no answer. Her breath came a 
little quickly as she tried to grasp the full significance of 
this tremendous concept. 

" In a million years, or so," the engineer continued, " may 
not the descendants of these things once more be men, or 
something very like them? In other words, aren't wc 
possibly witnessing the recreation of the human type? 
Aren't these the real pithecanthropi erecti, rather than the 
brown-skinned, reddish-haired creatures of the biological 
text-books? There's our problem!" 

She made no answer, but a sudden overmastering curiosity leaped into her eyes. 

" Let me see them for myself ! I must I I will I " 

And before he could detain her, the girl had started 
back into the room whence they had come. 

" No, no ! No, Beatrice I " he whispered, but she paid 
no heed to him. Across the littered floor she made her 
way. And by the time Stern could reach her side, she had 
set her face to the long, crumbling crack in the wall and 
with a burning eagerness was peering out into the forest 



CHAPTER XXI 

EVE BECOMES AN AMAZON 

Stern laid a hand on her shoulder, striving to draw her 
away. This spectacle, it seemed to him, was no fit sight 
for her to gaze on. But she shrugged her shoulders as if 
to say: " I'm not a child! I'm your equal, now, and I 
must see ! " So the engineer desisted. And he, too, set 
his eye to the twisting aperture. 

At sight of the narrow segment of forest visible through 
it, and of the several members of the Horde, a strong revulsion came upon him. 

Up welled a deep-seated love for the memory of the race 
of men and women as they once had been  the people of 
the other days. Stem almost seemed to behold them again, 
those tall, athletic, straight-limbed men; those lithe, deepbreasted women, fair-skinned and with luxuriant hair; all 
alike now plunged for a thousand years in the abyss of 
death and of eternal oblivion. 

Never before had the engineer realized how dear, how 
infinitely close to him his own race had been. Never had 
he so admired its diverse types of force and beauty, as 
now, now when all were but a dream. 

" Ugh I " thought he, disgusted beyond measure at the 
sight before him. '' And all these things are just as much 
alike as so many ants in a hill ! I question if they've got 
the reason and the socialized intelligence of ants ! " 

He heard the girl breathe quick, as she, too, watched what 
was going on outside. A certain change had taken place 
there. The mist had somewhat thinned away, blown by 
the freshening breeze through Madison Forest and by the 

"5 




ii6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

higher-rising sun. Both watchers could now see further 
into the woods ; and both perceived that the Horde was for 
the most part disposing itself to sleep. 

Only a few vague, uncertain figures were now moving 
about, with a strangely unsteady gait, weak-kneed and 
simian. 

In the nearest group, which Stem had already had a 
chance to study, all save one of the creatures had lain 
down. The man and woman could quite plainly hear the 
raucous and bestial snoring of some half-dozen of the 
gorged Things. 

 Come away, you've seen enough, more than enough !  
he whispered in the girl's ear. 

She shook her head. 

" No, no ! " she answered, under her breath. " How 
horrible  and yet, how wonderful ! " 

Then a misfortune happened; trivial yet how direly 
pregnant ! 

For Stem, trying to readjust his position, laid his right 
hand on the wall above his head. 

A little fragment of loose marble, long since ready to 
fall, dislodged itself and bounced with a sharp click against 
the steel I-beam over which they were both peeking. 

The sound, perhaps, was no greater than you would 
make in snapping an ordinary lead-pencil in your fingers; 
yet on the instant three of the Things raised their bulbous 
and exaggerated heads in an attitude of intense, suspicious 
listening. Plain to see that their senses, at least, excelled 
those of the human being, even as a dog's might 

The individual which, alone of them all, had been standing, wheeled suddenly round and made a step or two toward 
the building. Both watchers saw him with terrible distinctness, there among the sumacs and birches, with the 
beauty of which he made a shocking contrast. 

Plain now was the simian aspect, plain the sidelong and 
uncertain gait, bent back and crooked legs, the long, pen 
dulous arms and dully ferocious face. 



EVE BECOMES AN AMAZON 117 

And as the Thing listened, its hair bristling, it thrust 
its villainous, apelike head well forward. Open fell the 
mouth, revealing the dog-teeth and the blue, shriveledlooking gums. 

A wrinkle creased the low, dull brow. Watching with 
horrified fascination, Stern and Beatrice beheld  and heard 
 the creature sniff the air, as though taking up some scent 
of danger or of the hunt. 

Then up came the right arm; they saw the claw-hand 
with a spear, poise itself a moment. From the open mouth 
burst with astounding force and suddenness a snarling 
yowl, inarticulate, shrill, horrible beyond all thinking. 

An instant agitation took place all through the forest. 
The watchers could see only a small, fan-like space of it  
and even this, only a few rods from the building  yet by 
the confused, vague noise that began, they knew the alarm 
had been given to the whole Horde. 

Here, there, the cry was repeated. A shifting, moving 
sound began. In the visible group, the Things were getting 
to their handlike feet, standing unsteadily on their looseskinned, scaly legs, gawping about them, whining and clicking with disgusting sounds. 

Sudden, numbing fear seized Beatrice. Now for the 
first time she realized the imminent peril ; now she regretted 
her insistence on seeing the Horde at close range. 

She turned, pale and shaken; and her trembling hand 
sought the engineer's. 

He still, for a moment, kept his eye to the crack, fascinated by the very horror of the sight. Then all at once 
another figure shambled into view. 

" A female one ! " he realized, shuddering. Too monstrously hideous, this sight, to be endured. With a gasp, 
the man turned back. 

About Beatrice he drew his arm. Together, almost as 
soundlessly as wraiths, they stole away, out through the 
office, out to the hallway, into the dim light of the arcade 
once more. 




ii8 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Here, for a few moments, they knew that they were safe. 
Retreat through the Marble Court and up the stairs was 
fairly clear. There was but one entrance open into the 
arcade, the one through Pine Tree Gate; and this was 
blocked so narrowly by the giant bole that Stern knew 
there could be no general mob-rush through it  no attack 
which he could not for a while hold back, so long as hi 
ammunition and the girl's should last. 

Thus they breathed more freely now. Most of the tumult outside had been cut off from their hearing, by the 
retirement into the arcade. They paused, to plan their 
course. 

At Stem the girl looked eagerly. 

" Oh, oh, Allan  how horrible ! " she whispered. " It 
was all my fault for having been so headstrong, for having 
insisted on a look at them ! Forgive me ! " 

" S-h ! " he cautioned again. " No matter about that. 
The main thing, now, is whether we attack or wait?" 

"Attack? Now?" 

" I don't think much of going up-stairs without that pail 
of water. We'll have a frightful time with thirst, to say 
nothing of not being able to make the Pulverite. Water we 
must have ! If it weren t for your being here, I'd mighty 
soon wade into that bunch and see who wins ! But  well, 
I haven't any right to endanger  " 

Beatrice seized his hand and pulled him toward the doorway. 

"Come on!" cried she. "If you and I aren't a match 
for them, we don't deserve to live, that's all. You know 
how I can shoot now ! Come along ! " 

Her eyes gleamed with the light of battle, battle for 
liberty, for life; her cheeks glowed with the tides of generous blood that coursed beneath the skin. Never had 
Stem beheld her half so beautiful, so regdX in that clinging, 
barbaric Bengal robe of black and yellow, caught at the 
throat with the clasp of raw gold. 

A sudden impulse seized him, dominant, resistless. Foi 




EVE BECOMES AN AMAZON 119 

a brief moment he detained her; he held her back; about 
her supple body his arm tightened. 

She raised her face in wonder. He bent, a little, and on 
the brow he kissed her rapturously. 

" Thank God for such a comrade and a  friend ! " said 
he. 




CHAPTER XXII 

gods! 

Some few minutes later, together they approached Pine 
Tree Gate, leading directly out into the Horde. 

The girl, rosier than ever, held her Krag loosely in the 
hollow of her bare, warm right arm. One of Stern's revolvers lay in its holster. The other balanced itself in his 
right hand. His left held the precious water-pail, so vital 
now to all their plans and hopes. 

Girt in his garb of fur, belted and sandaled, well over 
six feet tall and broad of shoulder, the man was magnificent. 
His red beard and mustache, close-cropped, gave him a 
savage air that now well fitted him. For Stern was mad 
 mad clear through. 

That Beatrice should suffer in any way, even frcmi temporary thirst, raised up a savage resentment in his breast. 
The thought that perhaps it might not be possible to gain 
access to the spring at all, that these foul Things might try 
to blockade them and siege them to death, wrought powerfully on him. 

For himself he cared nothing. The girl it was who 
now preoccupied his every thought. And as they made 
their way through the litter of the explosion, toward the 
exit, slowly and cautiously, he spied out every foot of the 
place for possible danger. 

If fight he must, he knew now it would be a bnita], 
utterly merciless fight  slaughter, extermination without 
any limit, to the end. 

But there was scant time for thought. Already they 

I20 



GODS I 121 

could see daylight glimmering in through the gate, past the 
massive column of the conifer. Daylight  and with it 
came a thin and acrid smoke  and sounds of the uproused 
Horde in Madison Forest. 

" Slow I Slow, now ! " whispered Stern. " Don't let 'em 
know a thing until we've got 'em covered ! If we surprise 
'cm just right, who knows but the whole infernal mob may 
duck and run ? Don't shoot till you have to ; but when you 

" I know I " breathed she. 

Then, all at once, there they were at the gate, at the big 
tree, standing out there in the open, on the thick carpet of 
pine-spills. 

And before them lay the mossy, shaded forest aisles  
with what a horror camped all through that peaceful, wondrous place! 

" Oh ! " gasped Beatrice. The engineer stepped as though 
frozen. His hand tightened on the revolver-butt till the 
kifuckles whitened. And thus, face to face with the Horde, 
they stood for a long minute. 

Neither of them realized exactly the details of that first 
impression. The narrow slit of view which they had already got through the crack in the wall had only very 
imperfectly prepared them for any understanding of what 
these Things really were, en masse. 

But both Beatrice and the engineer understood, even at 
the first moment of their exit there, that they had entered 
an adventure whereof the end could not be foreseen; that 
here before them lay possibilities infinitely more serious 
than any they had contemplated. 

For one thing, they had underestimated the numbers of 
the Horde. They had thought, perhaps, there might be five 
hundred in all. 

The torches had certainly numbered no more than that 
But now they realized that the torch-bearers had been but 
a very small fraction of the whole ; for, as their eyes swept 
out through the forest, whence the fog had almost wholly 




122 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

risen, they beheld a moving, swarming mass of the creatures on every hand. A mass that seemed to extend on, 
on to indefinite vistas. A mass that moved, clicked, shifted, 
grunted, stank, snarled, quarreled. A mass of frightful 
hideousness, of inconceivable menace. 

The girl's first impulse was to turn, to retreat back into 
the building once more ; but her native courage checked it. 
For Stem, she saw, had no such purpose. 

Surprised though he was, he stood there like a rock, head 
up, revolver ready, every muscle tense and ready for whatsoever might befall. And through the girl flashed a thrill 
of admiration for this virile, indomitable man, coping with 
every difficulty, facing every peril  for her sake. 

Yet the words he uttered now were not of classic heroism. They were simple, colloquial, inelegant. For Stern,' 
his eyes blazing, said only : 

"We're in bad, girl! They're on  we've got to bluff 
-bluff like the devil ! " 

Have you ever seen a herd of cattle on the prairie, a 
herd of thousands, shift and face and, as by instinct, lower 
their homed heads against some enemy  a wolf-pack, 
maybe? 

You know then, how this Horde of dwarfish, blue, warty, 
misformed little horrors woke to the presence of the unknown enemy. 

Already half alarmed by the warning given by the one, 
which, near the crack in the wall, had sniffed the intruders 
and had howled, the pack now broke into conmiotion. Stem 
and Beatrice saw a confused upheaving, a shifting and a 
tumult. They heard a yapping outcry. The long, thin 
spears began to bristle. 

And all at once, as a dull, ugly homet-hum rose through 
the wood, they knew the moment for quick action was 
upon them. 

" Here goes I " cried Stem, raging. " Let's see how this 
will strike the hell-hounds ! " 

His face white with passion and with loathing hate, be 



N 



GODS! 123 

raised the automatic. He aimed at none of the pack, for 
angry as he was he realized that the time was not yet come 
for killing, if other means to reach the spring could possibly 
avail. 

Instead he pointed the ugly blue muzzle up toward the 
branches of a maple, tmder which a dense swarm of the 
Horde had encamped and now was staring, apelike, at him. 

Then his finger sought the trigger. And five crackling 
spurts of fiame, five shots spat out into the calm and misty 
air of moniing. A few severed leaves swayed down, idly, 
with a swinging motion. A broken twig fell, hung suspended a moment, then detached itself again and dropped to 
earth. 

" Good Lord ! Look a' that, will you ? " cried Stem. 

A startled cry broke from the girl's lips. 

Both of them had expected some effect from the sudden 
fusillade, but nothing like that which actually resulted. 

For, as the quick shots echoed to stillness again, and even 
before the first of the falling leaves had spiraled to the 
ground, an absolute, unbroken silence fell upon that vile 
rabble of beast-men  the silence of a nimibing, paralyzing, 
sheer brute terror. 

Some stood motionless, crouching on their bandy legfs, 
holding to whatsoever tree or bush was nearest, staring with 
wild eyes. 

Others dropped to their knees. 

But by far the greater part, thousands on thousands of 
the little monstrosities, fell prone and grovelling. Their 
hideous masklike faces hidden, there they lay on the moss 
and all among the undergrowth, the trampled, desecrated, 
befouled undergrowth of Madison Forest. 

Then all at once, over and beyond them. Stem saw the 
blue-curling smudge of the remains of the great fire by the 
spring. 

He knew that, for a few brief, all-precious moments, the 
way might possibly be clear to come and go  to get water  
to save Beatrice and himself from the thirst-tortures  to 




124 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

procure the one necessary thing for the making of his 
Pulverite. 

His heart gave a great, up-bounding leap. 

" Look, Beatrice ! ' cried he, his voice ringing out over 
the terror-stricken things. Look  we're gods! While 
this lasts  gods! Come, now's our only chance! Come 
on!--'' 




CHAPTER XXIII 



THE OBEAH 



Together, as in a dream  a nightmare, dazed, incredible 
grotesque  they advanced out into the dim-shaded forest 
aisles. 

" Don't look ! ' Stem exclaimed, shuddering at sight of 
the unspeakable hideousness of the Things, at glimpses of 
gnawed bones, grisly bits of flesh, dried gouts of blood 
upon the woodland carpet. " Don't think  just come along I 

" Five minutes, and we're safe, there and back again. 
S-h-h-h! Don't hurry! Count, now  count your steps  
one, two, three  four, five, six  so  steady, steady!  " 

Now they were ten yards from the tower, now twenty. 
Bravely they walked, now straight ahead among the trees, 
now circling some individual, some horrid group. Stem 
held the water-pail firmly. He gripped the revolver in a 
grasp of iron. The magazine-rifle lay in both the girl's 
hands, ready for instant use. 

Suddenly Stern fired again, three shots. 

" Some of 'em are moving, over there ! " he said in a 
crisp, ugly tone. " I guess a little lead close to their cars 
will fix 'em for a while 1 " 

His voice went to a hoarse whisper. 

" Gods ! " he repeated. " Don't forget it, for a moment ; 
don't lose that thought, for it may pull us through ! These 
creatures here, if they're descended from the blacks, must 
have some story, some tradition of the white man. Of his 
mastery, his power! We'll use it now, by Heaven, as it 
never yet was used ! " 

Then he began to count again; and so, tense, watching 

125 




126 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

with eager-burning eyes and taut muscles, the man and 
woman made their way of frightful peril. 

A snuffling howl rose. 

" You will, will you ? " Stem cried, adding another kick 
to the one he had just dealt to one of the creatures, who 
had ventured to look up at their approach. " Lie down, 
ape ! " And with the clangorous metal pail he smote the 
ugly, brutish skull. 

Beatrice gasped with fear; but the bluff made good. 
The creature grovelled, and again the pair strode forward, 
masterfully. Masterfully they had to go, or not at all. 
Masterfully, or die. For now their all-in-all lay just in 
that grim, steel-hard sense of mastery. 

Before the girVs eyes a sort of haze seemed forming. 
Her heart beat thick and heavy. Stem's counting sounded 
very far away and strange ; she hardly recognized his voice. 
To her came wild, disjointed, confused impressions  now 
a bony and distorted back, now a simian head; again a 
group that crouched and cowered in its filthy squalor, hideously. 

Then all at once, there right before her she saw the little 
woodland path that, slightly descending, led past a big oak 
she well knew, down to the margin of the pool. 

" Steady, girl, steady ! " came the engineer's warning, 
tense as piano-wire. " Almost there, now. What's that? ' 

For a brief instant he hesitated. The girl felt his arm 
grow even more taut, she heard his breath catch. Then 
she, too, looked  and saw. 

It was enough, that sight, to have smitten with sick 
horror the bravest man who ever lived. For there, beside 
the smouldering embers of the great feast-fire, littered with 
bones and indescribable refuse, a creature was squatting on 
its hams one of the Horde, indeed, yet vastly different, 
tremendously more venomous, more dangerous of aspect. 

Stem knew at once that here, not prostrate nor yet crouching, was the chief of the blue Horde. 

He knew it by the superior size and strength of the Thing, 




THE OBEAH 127 

by the almost manlike cunning of the low, gorilla face, the 
gleam of intelligence in the reddened eye, the crude wreath 
of maple-leaves upon the head, the necklace of finger-bones 
strung around the neck. 

But most of all, he knew it by a thing that shocked him 
more than the sight of stark, outright cannibalism would 
have done. A simple thing, yet how ominous I A thing 
that argued reason in this reversion from the human; a 
thing that sent the shuddering chills along the engineer's 
spine. 

For the chief, the obeah-man of this vile drove, rising 
now from beside the fire with a gibbering chatter and a 
look of bestial malice, held between his fangs a twisted 
brown leaf I 

Stem knew at a glance the leaf was the rudely cured 
product of some degenerated tobacco-plant. He saw a 
glow of red at the tip of the close-rolled tobacco. Vsr 
issued from the chief's slit-mouth. 

"Good Lord  he's  smoking!" stammered the engineer. 
"And that means  means an almost human brain. And 
 quick, Beatrice, the water ! I didn't expect this ! Thought 
they were all alike. Back to the tower, quick! Here, fill 
the pail  I'll keep him covered ! " 

Up he brought the automatic, till the bead lay fair upon 
the naked, muscular breast of the obeah. 

Beatrice handed Stem the rifle, then snatching the pail, 
dipped it, filled it to the brim. Stern heard the water lap 
and gurgle. He knew it was but a few seconds, yet it 
seemed an hour to him, at the very least. 

Keener than ever before in his whole life, his mental pictures now limned themselves with lightning rapidity upon 
his brain. 

Stamped on his consciousness was this lithe, lean, formidable body, showing beyond dispute its human ancestry ; 
the right hand that held a steel-pointed spear ; the horrible 
ornament (a withered little smoked hand) that dangled 
from the left wrist by a cord of platted fiber. 




128 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Vividly Stem' beheld a deep gash or scar that ran from 
the chief's right eye  a diill, fishlike eye, evidently destroyed 
by that wound  down across the leathery cheek, across the 
prognathous jaw; a reddish-purple wale, which on that 
clay-blue skin produced an effect indescribably repulsive. 

Then the chief grunted, and moved forward, toward them. 
Stern saw that the gait was almost human, not shuiQing 
and uncertain like that of the others, but firm and vigorous. 
He estimated the height at more than five feet, eight inches ; 
the weight at possibly one hundred and forty pounds. Even 
at that juncture, his scientific mind, always accustomed 
to judging, instinctively registered these data, with the 
others. 

" Here, you, get back there ! " shouted Stern, as the girl 
rose again from filling the pail. 

The cry was instinctive, for even as he uttered il, he 
knew it could not be understood. A thousand years of 
rapid deneration had long wiped all traces of English 
speech from the brute-men, who now, at most, chattered 
some bestial gibberish. Yet the warning echoed loudly 
through Madison Forest; and the obeah hesitated. 

The tone, perhaps, conveyed some meaning to that brain 
behind the sloping forehead. Perhaps some dim, racial 
memory of human speech still lingered in that mind, in that 
strange organism which, by some freak of atavism, had 
" thrown back " out of the mire of returning animality 
almost to 4he human form and stature once again. 

However that may have been, the creature-chief halted in 
his advance. Undecided he stood a moment, leaning upon 
his spear, sucking at the rude mockery of a cigar. Stern 
remembered having seen Consul, the trained chimpanzee, 
smoke in precisely the same manner, and a nameless loathing 
filled him at his mockery of the dead, buried past. 

" Let me carry the pail ! " said he. " We've got to 
hurry  hurry  or it may be too late ! " 

" No, no ni keep the water ! " she answered, panting. 
 You need both hands clear ! Come ! " 



THE OBEAH 119 

Thus they turned, and, with a shuddering glance behind, 
started back for the tower again. 

But the obeah, with a whining plaint, spat away his 
tobaccoleaf. They heard a shuffle of feet. And, looking 
round again, both saw that he had crossed the little brook. 

There he stood now, his right hand out, palm upward, 
his lips curled in the ghastly imitation of a smile, blue gums 
and yellow tushes showing, a sight to freeze the blood with 
horror. Yet through it all, the meaning was most clearly 
evident. 

Beatrice, laden as she was with the heavy water-bucket, 
more precious now to them than all the wealth of the dead 
world, would still have retreated, but with a word of stem 
ccxnmand he bade her wait. He stopped short in his 
tracks. 

" Not a step ! " commanded he. " Hold on ! // he makes 
friends with us  with gods  that's a million times better 
every way ! Hold on  wait, no  this is his move ! " 

He faced the obeah. His left hand gripped the repeating 
rifle, his right the automatic, held in readiness for instant 
action. The muzzle sight never for a second left its aim 
at the chief's heart. 

And for a second silence fell there in the forest. Save 
for the rustling murmur of the Horde, and a faint, woodland 
trickle of the stream, you might have thought the place 
untouched by life. 

Yet death lurked there, and destiny  the destiny of the 
whole world, the future, the human race, forever and ever 
without end ; and the cords of Fate were being loosed for 
a new knitting. 

And Stem, with Beatrice there at his side, stood harsh 
and strong and very grim ; stood like an incarnation of man's 
life, waiting. 

And slowly, step by step, over the yielding, noiseless 
moss, the grinning, one-eyed, ghastly obeah-man came 
nearer, nearer still. 




CHAPTER XXIY 

THE FIGHT IN THE FOREST 

Now the Thing was close, very close to them, while a hush 
lay upon the watching Horde and on the forest. So close, 
that Stem could hear the soughing breath between those 
hideous lips and see the twitching of the wrinkled lid over 
the black, glittering eye that blinked as you have often seen 
a chimpanzee's. 

All at once the obeah stopped. Stopped and leered, his 
head craned forward, that ghastly rictus on his mouth. 

Stem's hot anger welled up again. Thus to be detained, 
inspected and seemingly made mock of by a creature no 
more than three-quarters human, stung the engineer to 
rage. 

" What do you want? " cried he, in a thick and unsteady 
voice. "Anything I can do for you? If not, I'll be 
going ! " 

The creature shook its head. Yet something of Stem's 
meaning may have won to its smoldering intelligence. For 
now it raised a hand. It pointed to the pail of water, 
then to its own mouth; again it indicated the pail, then 
stretched a long, repulsive finger at the mouth of Stem. 

The meaning seemed clear. Stem, even as he stood 
there in anger  and in wonder, too, at the fearlessness of 
this superthing  grasped the significance of the action. 

"Why, he must mean," said he, to Beatrice, "he must 
be trying to ask whether we intend to drink any of the 
water, what? Maybe it's poisoned, now, or something! 
Maybe he's trying to warn us ! " 

130 




THE FIGHT IN THE FOREST 131 



tt 



Warn US? Why should he ? " 

How can I tell? It isn't entirely impossible that he 
still retains some knowledge of his human ancestors. Perhaps that tradition may have been handed down, some 
way, and still exists in the form of a crude beast-religion." 

"Yes, but then?'' 

" Perhaps he wants to get in touch with us, again ; learn 
from us ; try to struggle up out of the mire of degeneration, 
who knows? If so and it's possible  of course he'd try 
to warn us of a poisoned spring ! " 

Acting on this hypothesis, of which he was now halfconvinced. Stem nodded. By gesture-play he answered: 
Yes. Yes, this woman and he intended to drink of the 
water. The obeah-man, grinning, showed signs of lively 
interest His eyes brightened, and a look of craft, of 
wizened cunning crept over his uncanny features. 

Then he raised his head and gave a long, shrill, throaty 
call, ululating and unspeakably weird. 

Something stirred in the forest. Stem heard a rustle 
and a creeping murmur; and quick fear chilled his heart. 

To him it seemed as though a voice were calling, perhaps 
the inner, secret voice of his own subjective self  a voice 
that cried: 

" You, who must drink water  now he knows you are 
not gods, but mortal creatures. Tricked by his question 
and your answer, your peril now is on you! Flee!' 

The voice died. Stem found himself, with a strange, 
taut eagerness tingling all through him, facing the obeah 
and  and not daring to turn his back. 

Retreat they must, he knew. Retreat, at once ! Already 
in the forest he understood that heads were being lifted, 
beastlike ears were listening, bmte eyes peering and apehands clutching the little, flint-pointed spears. Already the 
girl and he should have been half-way back to the tower; 
yet still, inhibited by that slow, grinning, staring advance of 
the chief, there the engineer stood. 

But all at once the spell was broken. 




132 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

For with a cry, a hoarse and frightful yell of passion, the 
obeah leaped  leaped like a huge and frightfully agile ape 
 leaped the whole distance intervening. 

Stern saw the Thing's red-gleaming eyes fixed on Beatrice. In those eyes he clearly saw the hell-fiame of lust. 
And as the woman screamed in terror, Stern pulled trigger with a savage curse. 

The shot went wild. For at the instant  though he felt 
no pain  his arm dropped down and sideways. 

Astounded, he looked. Something was wrong! What? 
His trigger-finger refused to serve. It had lost all power, 
all control. 

For God's sake, what could it be? 

Then  all this taking but a second  Stern saw ; he knew 
the truth. Staring, pale and horrified, he understood. 

There, through the fleshy part of his forearm, thrust 
clean from side to side by a lightning-swift stroke, he saw 
the obeah's spear ! 

It dangled strangely in the firm muscles. The steel barb 
and full eighteen inches of the shaft were red and driiq)ing. 

Yet still the engineer felt no slightest twinge of pain. 

From his ntunbed, paralyzed hand the automatic dropped, 
fell noiselessly into the moss. 

And with a formless roar of killing-rage, Stem swung 
on the obeah, with the rifle. 

Stern felt his heart about to burst with hate. He did 
not even think of the second revolver in the holster at his 
side. With only his left hand now to use, the weapon 
could only have given clumsy service. 

Instead, the man reverted instantly to the jungle stage, 
himself  to the law of claw and fang, of clutching talon, 
of stone and club. 

The beloved woman's cry, ringing in his ears, drove him 
mad. Up he whirled the Krag again, up, up, by the muzzle ; 
and down upon that villainous skull he dashed it with a force 
that would have brained an ox. 

The obeah, screeching, reeled back. But he was not 



THE FIGHT IN THE FORE|ST 133 

dead. Not dead, only stunned a moment. And Stern 
horrified, found himself holding only a gun-barrel. The 
stock, shattered, had whirled away and vanished among the 
tall and waving ferns. 

Beatrice snatched up the fallen revolver. She stumbled; 
and the pail was empty. Spurting, splashing away, the 
precious water flew. No time, now, for any more. 

For all about them, behind them and on every hand, the 
Things were closing in. 

They had seen blood  had heard the obeah's cry; they 
knew ! Not gods, now, but mortal creatures I Not gods I 

" Run ! Run! " gasped Beatrice. 

The spear still hanging from his arm, Stem wheeled and 
followed. High and hard he swung the rifle-barrel, like 
a war-club. 

No counting of steps, now ; no play at divinity. Panting, 
horror-stricken, frenzied with rage, bleeding, they ran. 
It was a hunt  the hunt of the last two humans by the 
nightmare Horde. 

In front, a bluish and confused mass seemed to dance 
and quiver through the forest; and a pattering rain of 
spears and little arrows began to fall about the fugitives. 

Then the girl's revolver sputtered in a quick volley ; and 
again, for a space, silence fell. The way again was clear. 
But in the path, silent and still, or writhing horribly, lay a 
few of the Things. And the pine-needles and soft moss 
were very red, in spots. 

Stern had his pistol out too, by now. For behind and on 
his flanks, like ferrets hanging to a hunted creature, the 
swarm was closing in. 

The engineer, his face very white and drawn, veins standing out on his sweat-beaded forehead, heard Beatrice cry 
out to him, but he could not understand her words. 

Yet as they ran, he saw her level the pistol and snap 
the hammer twice, thrice, with no result. The little dead 
cUck sounded like a death-warrant to him. 

" Empty ?  cried he. " Here, take this one f You can 




134 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

shoot better now than I cani' And into her hand he 
thrust the second revolver. 

Something stung him on the left shoulder. He glanced 
round. A dart was hanging there. 

With an oath, the engineer wheeled about. His eyes 
burned and his lips drew back, taut, from his fine white 
teeth. 

There, already recovered from the blow which would 
have killed a man ten times over, he saw the obeah snarling 
after him. Right down along the path the monster was 
howling, beating his breast with both huge fists. And, now 
feeling fear no more than pain. Stem crouched to meet his 
onslaught. 



CHAPTER XXy 

THE GOAL AND THROUGH IT 

It all happened in a moment of time a moment, long- in 
seeming  as an hour. The girl's revolver crackled, there 
behind him. Stem saw a little round bluish hole take shape 
in the obeah's ear, and red drops start. 

Then with a ghastly screaming, the Thing was upon him. 

Out struck the engineer, with the rifle-barrel. All the 
force of his splendid muscles lay behind that blow. The 
Thing tried to dodge. But Stem had been too quick. 

Even as it sprang, with talons clutching for the man's 
throat, the steel barrel drove home on the jaw. 

An unearthly, piercing yell split the forest air. Then 
Stem saw the obeah, his jaw hanging oddly awry, all loose 
and shattered, fall headlong in the path. 

But before he could strike again, could batter in the base 
of the tough skull, a moan from Beatrice sent him to her 
aid. 

" Oh, God ! " he cried, and sank beside her on his knees. 

On her forehead, as she lay gasping among the bushes 
he saw an ugly welt. 

' A stone ? They've hit her with a stone ! Killed her, 
perhaps f " 

Kneeling there, up he snatched the revolver, and in a 
deadly fire he poured out the last spitting shots, pointblank in the faces of the crowding rabble. 

Up he leaped. The rifle barrel flashed and glittered as 
he whirled it. Like a reaper, laying a clean swath behind 
him, the engineer mowed down a dozen of the beast-men. 

135 




136 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Shrieks grunts, snarls, mingled with his execrations. 

Then fair into a jabbering ape-face he dung the bloodstained barrel. The face fell, faded, vanished, as hideous 
illusions fade in a dream. 

And Stem, with a strength he never dreamed was his, 
caught up the fainting girl in his left arm, as easily as 
though she had been a child. 

Still dragging the spear which pierced his right  his right 
that yet protected her a little  he ran. 

Stones, darts, spears, clattered in about him. He heard 
the swish and tang of them ; heard the leaves flutter as the 
missiles whirled through. 

Struck? Was he struck again? 

He knew not, nor cared. Only he thought of shielding 
Beatrice. Nothing but that, just that! 

" The gate oh, let me reach the gate ! God! The gate " 

And all of a sudden, though how he could not tell, there 
he seemed to see the gate before him. Could it be? Or 
was that, too, a dream? A cruel, vicious mockery of his 
disordered mind? 

Yes  the gate! It must be! He recognized the pant 
pine, in a moment of lucidity. Then ever)rthing began to 
dance again, to quiver in the mocking sunlight. 

"The gate!" he gasped once more, and staggered on. 
Behind him, a little trail of blood-drops from his wounded 
arm fell on the trampled leaves. 

Something struck his bent head. Through it a blinding pain darted. Thousands of beautiful and tiny lights of 
every color began to quiver, to leap and whirl. 

" They've  set the building on fire ! " thought he ; yet all 
the while he knew it was impossible, he understood it was 
only an illusion. 

He heard the rustle of the wind through the forest. It 
blent and mingled with a horrid tumult of grunts, of clicking cries, of gnashing teeth and little bestial cries. 

" The  gate ! " sobbed Stern, between hard-set teeth, 
and stumbled forward, ever forward, through the Horde. 



THE GOAL, AND THROUGH IT 137 

To him protectingly, he clasped the beautiful body m the 
tiger-skin. 

Living? Was she living yet? A great, aching wonder 
filled him. Could he reach the stair with her, and bear her 
up it? Hurl back these devils? Save her, after all? 

The pain had grown exquisite, in his head. Something 
seemed hanunering there, with rlar strokes  3, red-hot 
sledge upon an anvil of white-hot steel. 

To him it looked as though a hundred, a thousand of the 
little blue fiends were leaping, shrieking, circling there in 
front of him. Ten thousand ! And he must break through. 

Break through! 

Where had he heard those words? Ah! Yes! 

To him instantly recurred a distant echo of a song, a 
Harvard football-song. He remembered. Now he was 
back again. Yale, o ; Harvard, 17  New Haven, 1898. And 
see the thousands of cheering spectators I The hats flying 
through the air  flags waving  red, most of them ! Crimson  like blood! 

Came the crash and boom of the old Harvard Band, with 
big Joe Foley banging the drum till it was fit to burst; 
with Marsh blowing his lungs out on the comet, and all the 
other fellows raising Cain. 

Uproar! Cheering! And again the music. Everybody 
was singing now, everybody roaring out that brave old 
fighting chorus : 

" Now  all to-geth-er, 

Smash them  and  break  through!' 

And see ! Look there ! The goal ! 

The scene shifted, all at once, in a quite unaccountable 
and puzzling manner. 

Somehow, victory wasn't quite won, after all. Not quttft 
yet. What was the matter, then? What was wrong? Where 
vms he? 




138 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Ah, the Goal! 

Yes, there through the ruck and mass of the Blues, he 
saw it, again, quite clearly. He was sure of that, anyhow. 

The goal-posts seemed a trifle near together, and they 
were certainly made of crumbling stone, instead of straight 
wooden beams. Odd, that! 

He wondered, too, why the management allowed trees to 
grow on the field, trees and bushes  why a huge pine should 
be standing right there by the left-hand post. That was 
certainly a matter to be investigated and complained of, 
later. But now was no time for kicks. 

" Probably some Blue trick," thought Stem. " No matter, it won't do 'em any good, this time! ' 

Ah! An opening! Stem's head went lower still. He 
braced himself for a leap. 

" Come on, come on I " he yelled defiance. 

Again he heard the cheering, once more, roaring downwind like a chorus of mad devils. 

An opening? No, he was mistaken. Instead, the Blues 
were massing there by the Goal. 

Bitterly he swore. Under his arm he tightened the ball. 
He ran ! 

What? 

They were trying to tackle? 

" Damn you ! " he cried, in boiling anger. " 111  I'll show 
you a trick or two  yet 1 " 

He stopped, circled, dodged the clutching hands, feinted 
with a tactic long unthought of, and broke into a straight, 
resistless dash for the posts. 

As he ran, he yelled : 

" Smash them  and  break through! " 

All his waning strength upgathered for that mn. Yet 
how strangely tired he felt  how heavy the ball was growing! 

What was the matter with his head ? With his right arm? 
They both ached hideously. He must have got hurt, some 




THE GOAL, AND THROUGH IT 139 

way, in one of the ' downs/' Some dirty work, somewhere. 
Rotten sport! 

He ran. Never in all his many games bad he seen sth 
a peculiar gridiron, all tangled and overgrown. Never, such 
a host of tackles. Hundreds of them! Where were the 
Crimsons ? What ? No support, no interference ? Hell I 

Yet the Goal was surely just there, now rit ahead. He 
ran. 

 Foul !  he shouted savagely, as a Blue struck at him, 
then another and another, and many more. The taste of 
Mood came to his tongue. He spat.  Foul ! " 

Right and left he dashed them, with a giant's strength. 
They scattered in panic, with strange and unintelligible 
cries. 

"The goal!" 

He reached it. And, as he crossed the line, he fell. 

" Down, down ! " sobbed he. 




CHAPTER XXVI 

BEATRICE DARES 

An hour later, Stem and Beatrice sat weak and shaken in 
their stronghold on the fifth floor, resting, trying to gather 
up some strength again, to pull together for resistance to 
the siege that had set in. 

With the return of reason to the engineer  his free bleeding had somewhat checked the onset of fever  and of consciousness to the girl, they began to piece out, bit by bit, 
the stages of their retreat. 

Now that Stem had barricaded the stairs, two stories 
below, and that for a little while they felt reasonably safe, 
they were able to take their bearings, to recall the flight, to 
plan a bit for the future, a future dark with menace, seemingly hopeless in its outlook. 

" If it  hadn't been for you," Beatrice was saying, " if 
you hadn't picked me up and carried me, when that stone 
stmck, I I" 

" How's the ache now ? " Stern hastily interrupted, in a 
rather weak yet brisk voice, which he was trying hard to 
render matter-of-fact. " Of course the lack of water, except that half-pint or so, to bathe your bmise with, is a 
rank barbarity. But if we haven't got any, we haven't  
that's all All  till we have another go at 'em ! " 

' Oh, Allan ! " she exclaimed, tremulously. " Don't 
think of me! Of me, when your back's gashed with a 
spear-cut, your head's battered, arm pierced, and we've 
neither water nor bandages  nothing of any kind to treat 
your wounds with ! " 

140 



BEATRICE DARES 141 

 Come now, don't you bother about me ! " he objected, 
trying hard to smile, though racked with pain. 'Til be 
O. K., fit as a fiddle, in no time. Perfect health and all 
that sort of thing, you know. It'll heal right away. 

" Head's clear again already, in spite of that whack 'with 
the war-club, or whatever it was they landed with. But 
for a while I certainly was seeing things. I had. 'em  had 
'em bad ! Thought  well, strange things. 

"My back? Only a scratch, that's all. It's bn to 
coagulate already, the blood has, hasn't it? " And he strove 
to peer over his own shoulder at the slash. But the pain 
made him desist. He could hardly keep back a groan. His 
face twitched involuntarily. 

The girl sank on her knees beside him. Her arm encircled him; her hand smoothed his forehead; and with a 
strange look she studied his unnaturally pale face. 

 It's your arm I'm thinking about, more than anything," 
said she.  We've got to have something to treat that with. 
Tell me, does it hurt you very much, Allan ? " 

He tried to laugh, as he glanced down at the wounded 
arm, which, ligatured about the spear-thrust with a thong, 
and supported by a rawhide sling, looked strangely blue 
and swollen. 

"Hurt me? Nonsense I I'll be fine and dandy in no 
time. The only trouble is, I'm not much good as a fighter 
this way. Southpaw, you see. Can't shoot worth a  a 
cent, you know, with my left. Otherwise, I wouldn't 
mind." 

" Shoot ? Trust me for that now I " she exclaimed. 
" We've still got two revolvers and the shotgun left, and 
lots of ammunition. I'll do the shooting  if there's got to 
be any done ! " 

" You're all right, Beatrice ! " exclaimed the wounded 
nian fervently. " What would I do without you ? And to 
think how near you came to  but never mind. That's over 
now ; forget it ! " 




142 DARKNESS AND DAWN 



"Yes, but what neict?" 

"Don't know. Get well, maybe. Things might be 
worse. I might have a broken arm, or something; laid 
up for weeks  slow starvation and all that. What's a 
mere puncture? Nothing I Now that the spear's out, it'll 
begin healing right away. 

"Bet a million, though, that What's-His-Name down 
there, Big Chief the Monk, won't get out of his scrape 
in a hurry. His face is certainly scrambled, or I miss my 
guess. You got him through the ear with one shot, by the 
way. Know that? Fact! Drilled it clean! Just a little 
to the right and you'd have hcul him for keeps. But never 
mind, we'll save him for the encore  if there is any." 

" You think they'll try again?" 

"Can't say. They've lost a lot of fighters, killed and 
wounded, already. And they've had a pretty liberal taste 
of our style. That ought to hold them for a while ! We'll 
see, at any rate. And if luck stays good, we'll maybe have 
a thing or two to show them if they keep on hanging round 
where they aren't wanted ! " 

Came now a little silence. Beside Stem the girl sat, half 
supporting his wounded body with her firm, white arm. 
Thirst was beginning to torment them both, particularly 
Stem, whose injuries had already given him a marked temperature. But water there was absolutely none. And so, 
still planless, glad only to recuperate a little, content that 
for the present the Horde had been held back, they waited. 
Waiting, they both thought. The girl's thoughts were all 
of him ; but he, man-fashion, was trying to piece out what 
had happened, to frame some coherent idea of it all, to 
analyze the urgent necessities that lay upon them both. 

Here and there, a disjointed bit recurred to him, even 
from out of the delirium that had followed the blow on 
the head. From the time he had recovered his senses in 
the building, things were clearer. 

He knew that the Horde, temporarily frightened by his 
mad rush, had given him time to sttunble up again and once 



BEATRICE DARES 143 

more lift the girl, before they had ventured to creep into 
the arcade in search of their prey. 

He remembered that the spear had been gone then. Raving, he must have broken and plucked it out. The blood, 
he recalled, was spurting freely as he had carried Beatrice 
through the wreckage and up to the first landing, where 
she had regained partial consciousness. 

Then he shuddered at recollection of that stealthy, apelike creeping of the Horde scouts in among the ruins, furtive 
and silent ; their sniffing after the blood-track ; their frightful agility in clambering with feet and hands alike, swinging themselves up like chimpanzees, swarming aloft on the 
death-hunt. 

He had evaded them, from story to story. Beatrice, able 
now to walk, had helped him roll down balustrades and 
building-stones, fling rocks, wrench stairs loose and block 
the way. 

And so, wounding their pursuers, yet tracked always by 
more and ever more, they had come to the landing, where 
by aid of the rifle barrel as a lever they had been able to 
bring a whole wall crashing down, to choke the passage. 
That had brought silence. For a time, at least, pursuit had 
been abandoned. In the sliding, dusty avalanche of the 
wall, hurled down the stairway, Stern knew by the grunts 
and shrieks which had arisen that some of the Horde had 
surely perished  how many, he could not tell. A score or 
two at the very least, he ardently hoped. 

Fear, at any rate, had been temporarily injected into the 
rest For the attack had not yet been renewed. Outside 
in the forest, no sign of the Horde, no sound. A disconcerting, ominous calm had settled like a pall. Even the 
birds, recovered from their terrors, had begun to hop about 
and take up their twittering little household tasks. 

As in a kind of clairvoyance, the engineer seemed to 
know there would be respite until night. For a little while, 
at least, there could be rest and peace. But when darkness 
should have settled down  




144 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

' If they'd only show themselves !  thought he, his leaden 
eyes closing in an overmastering lassitude, a vast swooning 
weakness of blood-loss and exhaustion. Not even his 
parched thirst, a veritable torture now, could keep his 
thoughts from wandering. "If they'd tackle again, I could 
score with  with lead  what's that I'm thinking? I'm not 
delirious, am I?" 

For a moment he brought himself back with a start, back 
to a full realization of the place. But again the drowsiness 
gained on him. 

" We've got guns now ; guns and ammunition,'' thought 
he. " We  could pick them oflf  from the windows. Pick 
them oflF  pick  them  oflF  " 

He slept. Thus, often, wounded soldiers sleep, with 
troubled dreams, on the verge of renewed battle which 
may mean their death, their long and wakeless slumber. 

He slept. And the girl, laying his gashed head gently 
back upon the pile of furs, bent over him with infinite compassion. For a long minute, hardly breathing, she watched 
him there. More quickly came her breath. A strange 
new light shone in her eyes. 

" Only for me, those wounds ! " she whispered slowly. 
" Only for me ! " 

Taking his head in both her hands, she kissed him as he 
lay unconscious. Kissed him twice, and then a third time. 

Then she arose. 

Quickly, as though with some definite plan, she chose 
from among their store of utensils a large copper kettle, one 
which he had brought her the week before from the little 
Broadway shop. 

She took a long rawhide rope, braided by Stem during 
their long evenings together. This she knotted firmly to 
the bale of the kettle. 

The revolvers, fully reloaded, she examined with care. 
One of them she laid beside the sleeper. The other she 
slid into her full, warm bosom, where the clinging tiger 
skin held it ready for her hand. 



BEATRICE DARES 145 

Then she walked noiselessly to the door leading into the 
hallway. 

Here for a moment she stood, looking back at the wounded 
man. Tears dimmed her eyes, yet they were very glad. 

" For your sake, now, everything ! " she said. " Everythiif  alll Oh, Allan, if you only knew! And now  
good4)yr' 

Then she was gone. 

And in the silent room, their home, which out of wreck 
and chaos they had made, the fevered man lay very still, 
his pulses throbbing in his throat. 

Outside, very far, very faint in the forests, a muffled 
drum b;an to beat again. 

And the slow shadows, lengthening across the floor, told 
that evening was drawing nigh. 




CHAPTER XXVII 

TO work! 

The engineer awoke with a start  awoke to find daylight 
gone, to find that dusk had settled, had shrouded the whole 
place in gloom. 

Confused, he started up. He was about to call out, 
when prudence muted his voice. For the moment he could 
not recollect just what had happened or where he was; but 
a vast impending consciousness of evil and of danger 
weighed upon him. It warned him to keep still, to make 
no outcry. A burning thirst quickened his memory. 

Then his comprehension returned. Still we and 
shaken, yet greatly benefited by his sleep, he took a few 
steps toward the door. Where was the girl? Was he 
alone? What could all this mean? 

" Beatrice ! Oh, Beatrice ! " he called thickly, in guarded 
tones. " Where are you ? Answer me ! " 

"Here  coming!" he heard her voice. And then he 
saw her, dimly, in the doorway. 

" What is it ? Where have you been ? How long have 
I been asleep?" 

She did not answer his questions, but came quickly to 
him, took his hand, and with her own smoothed his brow. 

" Better, now ? " asked she. 

" Lots ! I'll be all right in a little while. It's nothing. 
But what have you been doing all this time? " 

"Come, and I'll show you." She led him toward the 
other room. 

He followed, in growing wonder. 

146 




TO WORK! 147 

''No attack, yet?" 

"None. But the drums have been beating for a long 
time now. Hear that?'' 

They listened. To them drifted a dull, monotonous 
sound, harbinger of war. 

Stem laughed bitterly, chokingly, by reason of his thirst. 

"Much good their orchestra will do them," said he, 
"when it comes to facing soft-nosed .38's! But tell me, 
what was it you were going to show me? " 

Quickly she went over to their crude table, took up a 
dish and came back to him. 

" Drink this ! " bade she. 

He took it, wondering. 

"What? Coffee f But?" 

" Drink I IVe had mine, already. Drink ! " 

Half-stupefied, he obeyed. He drained the whole dish 
at a draft, then caught his breath in a long sigh. 

" But this means water ! " cried he, with renewed vigor. 
"And?" 

" Look here," she directed, pointing. There on the circular hearth stood the copper kettle, three-quarters full. 

" Water ! You've got water? " He started forward in 
amazement. "While I've been sleeping? Where  ?" 

She laughed with real enjoyment. 

"It's nothing," she disclaimed. "After what you've 
done for me, this is the merest trifle, Allan. You know 
that big cavity made by the boiler-explosion? Yes? Well, 
when we looked down into it, before we ventured out to 
the spring, I noticed a good deal of water at the t>ottom, 
stagnant water, that had run out of the boiler and settled 
on the hard clay floor and in among the cracked cement. I 
just merely brought up some, and strained and boiled it, 
thafs all. So you see  " 

" But, my Lord ! " burst out the man, " d'you mean to say 
jrou  you went down there  alone?" 

Once more the girl laughed. 

" Not alone," she answered. " One of the automatics 




148 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

was kind enough to bear me company. Of course the main 
stairway was impassable. But I found another way, off 
through the east end of the building and down some stairs 
we haven't used at all, yet. They may be useful, by the 
way, in case of  well  s, retreat. Once I'd reached the 
arcade, the rest was easy. I had that leather rope tied 
to the kettle handle, you see. So all I had to do was   

" But the Horde! The Horde? " 

" None of them down there, now  that is, alive. None 
when I was there. All at the war-council, I imagine. I 
just happened to strike it right, you see. It wasn't anything. We simply had to have water, so I went and got 
some, that's all." 

"That's all?" echoed Stern, in a trembling voice. 
That's-ii/// " 

Then, lest she see his face even by the dim light through 
the window, he turned aside a minute. For the tears in his 
eyes, he felt, were a weakness which he would not care to 
reveal. 

But presently he faced the girl again. 

" Beatrice," said he, " words fall so flat, so hopelessly 
dead; they're so inadequate, so anticlimatic at a time like 
this, that I'm just going to skip them all. It's no use thank 
ing you, or analyzing this thing, or saying any of the commonplace, stupid things. Let it pass. You've got water, 
that's enough. You've made good, where I failed. Well  " 

His voice broke again, and he grew silent. But she, peering at him with wonder, laid a hand upon his shoulder. 

" Come," said she, " you must eat something, too. I've 
got a little supper ready. After that, the Pulverite? " 

He started as though shot. 

"That's so! I can make it now!" cried he, new life 
and energy suffusing him. " Even with my one hand, if 
you help me, I can make it ! Supper ? No, oo ! To work ! ' 

But she insisted, womanlike ; and he at )ast consented to 
a bite. When this was over, they began prqmrations for 
the manufacture of the terrible explosive. Stem's own 




TO WORK ! 149 

secret and invention, which, had not the cataclysm inter 
vened> would have made him ten times over a millionaire. 
More precious now to him, that knowledge, than all the 
golden treasures of the dead, forsaken world! 

 We've got to risk a light," said he. " If it's turned low, 
and shaded, maybe they won't learn our whereabouts. But 
however that may be, we can't work in the dark. It would 
be too horribly perilous. One false move, one wrong combination, even the addition of one ingredient at the improper 
moment, and  well  you understand." 

She nodded. 

" Yes," said she. ' And we don't want to quit  just 
yet!" 

So they lighted the smaller of their copper lamps, and 
set to work in earnest. 

On the table, cleared of dishes and of food, Stern placed 
in order eight glass bottles, containing the eight basic chemicals for his reaction. 

Beside him, at his left hand, he set a large metal dish 
with three quarts of water, still warm. In front of him 
stood his copper tea-kettle  the strangest retort, surely in 
which the terrific compound ever had been distilled. 

" Now our chairs, and the lamp," said he, " and we're 
ready to begin. But first," and, looking earnestly at her, 
"first, tell me frankly, wouldn't you just a little rather 
have me carry out this experiment alone? You could wait 
elsewhere, you know. With these uncertain materials and 
all the crude conditions we've got to work under, there's 
no telling what  might happen. 

' I've never yet found a man who would willingly stand 
by and see me build Pulverite, much less a woman. It's 
frightful, this stuff is! Don't be ashamed to tell me; are 
you afraid?" 

For a long moment the girl looked at him. 

"Afraid  with youf" said she. 




CHAPTER XXVIII 

THE PULVERITE 

An hour passed. And now, under the circle of light cast 
by the hooded lamp upon the table, there in that bare, 
wrecked office-home of theirs, the Pulverite was coming to 
its birth. 

Already at the bottom of the metal dish lay a thin yellow 
cloud, something that looked like London fog on a December morning. There, covered with the water, it gently 
swirled and curdled, with strange metallic glints and oily 
sheens, as Beatrice with a gold spoon stirred it at the engineer's command. 

From moment to moment he dropped in a minute quantity 
of glycerin, out of a glass test-tube, graduated to the hundredth of an ounce. Keenly, under the lamp-shine, he 
watched the final reaction; his face, very pale and set, reflected a little of the mental stress that botmd him. 

Along the table-edge before him, limp in its sling, his 
wounded arm lay useless. Yet with his left hand he controlled the sleeping giant in the dish. And as he dropped 
the glycerin, he counted. 

"Ten, eleven, twelve  fifteen, sixteen  twenty! Now! 
Now pour the water oflf, quick! Quick!'' 

Splendidly the girl obeyed. The water ran, foaming 
strangely, out into a glass jar set to receive it. Her hands 
trembled not, nor did she hesitate. Only, a line formed 

150 




THE PULVERITE 151 

between her brows ; and her breath, half-held, came quickly 
throuph her lips. 

''Stop!" 

His voice rang like a shot. 

 Now, decant it through this funnel, into the vials I " | 

Again, using both hands for steadiness, she did his 
bidding. 

And one by one as she filled the little flasks of chained 
death, the engineer stoppered them with his left hand. 

When the last was done, Stern drew a tremendous sigh, 
and dashed the sweat from his forehead with a gesture of 
victory. 

Into flie residue in the dish he poured a little nitric acid. 

" That's got no kick left in it, now, anyhow," said he 
relieved. "The HNO, tames it, quick enough. But the 
bottles  take care don't tip one over, as you love your 
life ! " 

He stood up, slowly, and for a moment remained there, 
his face in the shadow of the lamp-shade, holding to the 
table-edge for support, with his left hand. 

At him the girl looked. 

" And now," she began, ' now  ? " 

The question had no time for completion. For even as 
she spoke, a swift little something flicked through the window, behind them. 

It struck the opposite wall with a sharp crack! then fell 
slithering to the floor. 

Outside, against the building, they heard another and 
another little shock ; and all at once a second missile darted 
through the air. 

This hit the lamp. Stem grabbed the shade and steadied 
it. Beatrice stooped and snatched up the thing from where 
it lay beside the table. 

Only one glance Stem gave at it, as she held it up. A 
long reed stem he saw wrapped at its base with cotton fibers 
a fish-bone point, firm-lashed  and on that point a dull 
red stain, a blotch of something dry and shiny. 




152 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" Blow-gun darts I " oried he. " Poisoned ! They've 
seen the light  got our range! They're up there in the 
tree-tops  shooting at us I " 

With one puff, the light was gone. By the wrist he 
seized Beatrice. He dragged her toward the front wall, 
off to one side, out of range. 

"The flasks of Pulverite! Suppose a dart should hit 
one ? " exclaimed the girl. 

" That's so ! Wait here I'll get them ! " 

But she was there beside him as, in the thick dark, he 
cautiously felt for the deadly things and found them 
with a hand that dared not tremble. And though here, 
there, the little venom-stings whis-s-shed over them and 
past them, to shatter on the rear wall, she helped him bear 
the vials, all nine of them, to a place of safety in the lefthand front comer where by no possibility could they be 
struck. 

Together then, quietly as wraiths, they stole into the next 
room ; and there, from a window not as yet attacked, they 
spied out at the dark tree-tops that lay in dense masses 
almost brushing the walls. 

"See? See there?" whispered Stem in the girl's ear. 
He pointed where, not ten yards away and below, a blacker 
shadow seemed to move along a hemlock branch. Forgotten now, his wounds. Forgotten his loss of blood, his 
fever and his weakness. The sight of that creeping stealthy 
attack nerved him with new vigor. And, even as the girl 
looked. Stem drew his revolver. 

Speaking no further word, he laid the ugly barrel firm 
across the sill. 

Carefully he sighted, as best he could in that gloom lit 
only by the stars. Coldly as though at a target-shot, he 
brought the muzzle-sight to bear on that deep, crawling 
shadow. 

Then suddenly a spurt of fire split the night The crackling report echoed away. And with a bubbling scream, the 
shadow loosened from the limb, as a ripe fruit loosens. 



THE PULVERITE 153 

Vaguefy they saw it fall, whirl, strike a branch, slide off, 
and disappear. 

All at once a pattering rain of darts flickered around 
them. Stem felt one strike his fur jacket and bounce off. 
Another grazed the girl's head. But to their work they 
stood, and flinched not. 

Now her revolver was speaking, in antiphony with his; 
and from the branches, two, three, five, eight, ten of the 
ape-things fell. 

" Give it to 'em ! " shouted the engineer, as though he 
had a rent behind him. " Give it to 'em I " And 
again he pulled trigger. 

The revolver was empty. 

With a cry he threw it down, and, running to where the 
shotgun stood, snatched it up. He scooped into his pocket a 
handful of shells from the box where they were stored; 
and as he darted back to the window, he cocked both hammers. 

"Poom! Poom!" 

The deep baying of the Lefever roared out in twin jets 
of flame. 

Stem broke the gun and jacked in two more shells. 

Again he fired. 

"Good Heaven! How many of 'em are there in the 
trees?" shouted he. 

"Try the Pulverite!" cried Beatrice. "Maybe you 
might hit a branch ! " 

Stem flung down the gun. To the corner where the 
vials were standing he ran. 

Up he caught one  he dared not take two lest they should 
by some accident strike together. 

"Here  here, now, take this!" he bellowed. 

And from the window, aiming at a pine that stood seventyfive feet away  a pine whose branches seemed to hang thick 
with the Horde's blowgun-men  he slung it with all the 
strength of his uninjured arm. 




154 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Into the gloom it vanished, the little meteorite of latent 
death, of potential horror and destruction. 

" If it hits 'em, they'll think we are gods, after all, 
what?" cried the engineer, peering eagerly. But for a 
moment, nothing happened. 

" Missed it ! " he groaned. " If I only had my right 
arm to use now, I might  " 

Far below, down there a hundred feet beneath them and 
out a long way from the tower base, night yawned wide 
in a burst of hellish glare. 

A vast conical hole of flame was gouged in the dark. 
For a fraction of a second every tree, limb, twig stood out 
in vivid detail, as that blue- white glory shot aloft. 

All up through the forest the girl and Stem got a momentary glimpse of little, clinging Things, crouching misshapen, 
hideous. 

Then, as a riven and distorted whirl burst upward in a 
huge geyser of annihilation, came a detonation that ripped, 
stunned, shattered ; that sent both the defenders staggering 
backward from the window. 

Darkness closed again, like a gaping mouth that shuts. 
And all about the building, through the trees, and down 
again in a titanic, slashing rain fell the wreckage of things 
that had been stone, and earth, and root, and tree, and 
living creatures  that had been  that now were but one 
indistinguishable mass of ruin and of death. 

After that, here and there, small dark objects came dropping, thudding, crashing down. You might have thought 
some cosmic gardener had shaken his orchard, his orchard 
where the plums and pears were rotten-ripe. 

"One!" cried the engineer, in a strange, wild, exultant 
voice. 



CHAPTER XXIX 



THE BATTLE ON THE STAIRS 



Almost like the echo of his shout, a faint snarling cry 
rose from the corridor, outside. They heard a clicking, sliding, ominous sound ; and, with instant comprehension, knew 
the truth. 

"They've got up, some of them  somehow!" Stem 
cried. "They'll be at our throats, here, in a moment! 
Load! Load! You shoot  HI give 'em Pulverite!" 

No time, now, for caution. While the girl hastily threw 
in more cartridges, Stern gathered up all the remaining 
vials of the explosive. 

These, garnered along his wounded arm which clasped 
them to his body, made a little bristling row of death. His 
left hand remained free, to fling the little glass bombs. 

" Come ! Come, meet 'em  they mustn't trap us, here! " 

And together they crept noiselessly into the other room 
and thence to the corridor-door. 

Out they peered. 

" Look ! Torches ! " whispered he. 

There at the far end of the hallway, a red glare already 
flickered on the wall around the turn by the elevator-shaft. 
Already the confused sounds of the attackers were drawing 
near. 

They've managed to dig away the barricade, somehow," 
said Stem. " And now they're out for business  clubs, 
poisoned darts and all  and fangs, and claws! How many 
of 'em ? God knows ! A swarm, that's all ! " 

His mouth felt hot and dry, with fever, and the mad 
excitement of the impending battle. His skin seemed tense 

155 




156 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

and drawn, especially upon the forehead. As he stood 
there, waiting, he heard the girl's quick breathing. Though 
he could hardly see her in the gloom, he felt her presence 
and he loved it. 

'" Beatrice," said he, and for a moment his hand sought 
hers, " Beatrice, little girl o' mine, if this is the big finish, 
if we both go down together and there's no to-morrow, I 
want to tell you now  " 

A yapping outcry interrupted him. The girl seized his 
arm. Brighter the torchlight grew. 

" Allan ! " she fwhispered. " Come back, back, away 
from here. We've got to get up those stairs, there, at the 
other end of the hall. This is no kind of place to meet 
them  we're exposed, here. There's no protection I " 

"You're right," he answered. "Come!" 

Like ghosts they slid away, noiselessly, through the enshrouding gloom. 

Even as they gained the shelter of the winding stairway, 
the scouts of the Horde, flaring their torches into each room 
they passed, came into view around the corner at the distant 
end. 

Shuffling, hideous beyond all words by the fire-gleam, 
bent, wizened, blue, the Things swarmed toward them in 
a vague and shifting mass, a ruck of horror. 

The defenders, peering from behind the broken balustrade, could hear the guttural jabber of their beast-talk, the 
clicking play of their fangs ; could see the craning necks, the 
talons that held spears, bludgeons, blow-guns, even jagged 
rocks. 

Over all, the smoky gleams wavered in a ghastly interplay of light and darkness. Uncanny shadows leaped along 
the walls. From every comer and recess and black, empty 
door, ghoulish shapes seemed creeping. 

Tense, now, the moment hung. 

Suddenly the engineer bent forward, staring. 

" The chief I " he whispered. And as he spoke, Beatrke 
aimed. 



THE BATTLE ON THE STAIRS 157 

There, shambling among the drove of things, they saw 
him clearly for a moment. Uglier, more incredibly brutal 
than ever he looked, now, by that uncanny light. 

Stem saw  and rejoiced in the sight  that the obeah's 
jaw hung surely broken, all awry. The quick-blinking, 
narrow-lidded eyes shuttled here, there, as the creature 
sought to spy out his enemies. The nostrils dilated, to 
catch the spoor of man. Man, no longer god, but mortal. 

One hand held a crackling pine-knot. The other gripped 
the haft of a stone ax, one blow of which would dash to 
pulp the stoutest skull. 

This much Stern noted, as in a flash ; when at his side the 
girl's revolver spat. 

The report roared heavily in that constricted space. For 
a moment the obeah stopped short. A look of brute pain, 
of wonder, then of quintupled rage passed over his face. 
A twitching grin of passion distorted the huge, wounded 
gash of the mouth. He screamed. Up came the stone ax. 

" Again ! " shouted Stern. " Give it to him again I " 

She fired on the instant. But already, with a chattering 
howl, the obeah was running forward. And after him, 
screaming, snarling, foaming till their lips were all a slaver, 
the pack swept toward them. 

Stern dragged the girl away, back to the landing. 

"Up! C/p.'' he yelled. 

Then, turning, he hurled the second bcmib. 

A blinding glare dazzled him. A shock, as of a suddenly 
unleashed volcano, all but flung him headlong. 

Dazed, choked by the gush of fumes that burst in a 
billowing cloud out along the hall and up the stairs, he 
staggered forward. Tightly to his body he clutched the 
remaining vials. Where was Beatrice? He knew not. 
Everything boomed and echoed in his stunned ears. Below, 
there, he heard thunderous crashes as wrecked walls and 
floors went reeling down. And ever, all about him, eddied 
the strangling smoke. 




158 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Then how long after he knew not, he found himself 
gasping for air beside a window. 

" Beatrice ! " he shouted with his first breath. Everything 
seemed strangely still. No sound of pursuit, no howling 
now. Dead calm. Not even the drum-beat in the forest, 
far below. 

''Beatrice! Where  are you? Beatrice T 

His heart leaped gladly as he heard her answer. 

"Oh! Are you safe? Thank God I I  I was afraid  I 
didn't know" 

To him she ran along the dark passageway. 

" No more ! " she panted. " No more Pulverite here in 
the building I" plieaded she. "Or the whole tower will 
fall  and bury us I No more ! " 

Stem laughed. Beatrice was unharmed; he had found 
her. 

" ni sow it broadcast outside/' he answered, in a kind 
of exaltation, almost a madness from the strain and horror 
of that night, the weakness of his fever and his loss of 
blood.  Maybe the others, down there still, may need it. 
Here goes ! " 

And, one by one, all seven of the bombs he hurled far 
out and away, to right, to left, straight ahead, slinging 
them in vast parabolas from the height. 

And as they struck one by one, night blazed like noonday ; and even to the Palisades the crashing echoes roared. 

The forest, swept as by a giant broom, became a jackstraw tangle of destruction. 

Thus it perished. 

When the last vial of wrath had been out-poured, when 
silence had once more dropped its soothing mantle and the 
great brooding dark had come again, "girdled with gracious watchings of the stars," Stern spoke. 

" Gods I " he exclaimed exultantly. " Gods we are now 
to them  to such of them as may still live, Gods we are 
 gods we shall be forever! 

"Whatever happens now, they know us. The Great 




THE BATTLE ON THE STAIRS 159 

Wbitc Gods of Terror ! Thcyll flee before our very look I 
Unarmed, if we meet a thousand, we'll be safe. Gods I  

Another silence. 

Then suddenly he knew that Beatrice was weeping. 

And forgetful of all save that, forgetful of his weakness 
and his wounds, he comforted her  as only a man can 
comfort the woman he loves, the woman who, in turn, toves 
hnn. 




CHAPTER XXX 

CONSUMMATION 

After a while, both calmer grown, they looked again from 
the high window. 

" See ! " exclaimed the engineer, and pointed. 

There, far away to westward, a few straggling lights  
only a very few  slowly and uncertainly were making their 
way across the broad black breast of the river. 

Even as the man and woman watched, one vanished. 
Then another winked out, and did not reappear. No more 
than fifteen seemed to reach the Jersey shore, there to 
creep vaguely, slowly away and vanish in the dense primeval woods. 

" Ccie," said Stem at last. " We must be going, too. 
The night's half spent. By morning we must be very far 
away." 

What? We've got to leave the city?" 
Yes. There's no such thing as staying here now. The 
tower's quite untenable. Racked and shaken as it is, it's 
liable to fall at any time. But, even if it should stand, we 
can't live here any more." 

" But  where now ? " 

" I don't just know. Somewhere else, that's certain. 
Everything in this whole vicinity is ruined. The spring's 
gone. Nothing remains of the forest, nothing but horror 
and death. Pestilence is bound to sweep this place in the 
wake of such a  such an affair. 

" The sights all about here aren't such as you should 
see. Neither should I. We mustn't even think of them.. 

i6o 



tt 



it 



CONSUMMATION i6i 

Some way or other we can find a path down ottt of here, 
away  away  " 

" But," she cried anxiously, " but all our treasures? All 
the tools and dishes, all the food and clothing, and everything? All our precious, hard- won things?" 

" Nothing left of them now. Down on the fifth floor, 
at that end of the building, Tm positive there's nothing 
but a vast hole blown out of the side of the tower. So there's 
nothing left to salvage. Nothing at all." 
Can you replace the things ? " 

Why not? Wherever we settle down we can get along 
for a few days on what game I can snare or shoot with the 
few remaining cartridges. And after that  " 

"Yes?" 

" After that, once we get established a little, I can come 
into the city and go to raiding again. What we've lost is 
a mere trifle compared to what's left in New York. Why, 
the latent resources of this vast ruin haven't been even 
touched yet! We've got our lives. That's the only vital 
factor. With those everything else is possible. It all 
looks dark and hard to you now, Beatrice. But in a few 
days  wait and see ! " 

" Allan ! " 

'What, Beatrice?" 

" I trust you in everything. I'm in your hands. Lead me." 

 Come, then, for the way is long before us. Come I " 

Two hours later, undaunted by the far howling of a wolfpack, as the wan crescent of the moon came up the untroubled sky, they reached the brink of the river, almost 
due west of where the southern end of Central Park had 
been. 

This course, they felt, would avoid any possible encounter 
with stragglers of the Horde. Through Madison Forest  
or what remained of it  they had not gone ; but had struck 
eastward from the building, then northward, and so in a 
wide detour had avoided all the horrors that they knew lay 
near the wreck of the tower. 




i62 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

The river, flowing onward to the sea as cahnly as though 
pain and death and ruin and all the dark tragedy of the 
past night, the past centuries, had never been, filled their 
tired souls and bodies with a grateful peace. Slowly, 
gently it lapped the wooded shore, where docks and slips 
had all gone back to nature; the moonlit ripples spoke of 
beauty, life, hope, love. 

Though they could not drink the brackish waters, yet 
they laved their faces, arms and hands, and felt refreshed. 
Then for some time in silence they skirted the flood, ever 
northward, away from the dead city's heart. And the 
moon rose even higher, higher still, and great thoughts 
welled within their hearts. The cool night breeze, freshening in frcMn the vast salt wastes of the sea  unsailed forever now cooled their cheeks and soothed the fever of 
their thoughts. 

Where the grim ruin of Grant's Tomb looked down upon 
the river, they came at length upon a strange, rude boat, 
another, then a third  a whole flotilla, moored with plaited 
ropes of grass to trees along the shore. 

" These must certainly be the canoes of the attacking 
force from northward, the force that fought the Horde the 
night before we took a hand in the matter; fought, and 
were beaten, and devoured," said Stem. 

And with a practical eye, wise and cool even despite 
the pain of his wounded arm, he examined three or four 
of the boats as best he could by moonlight. 

The girl and he agreed on one to use. 

"Yes, this looks like the most suitable," judged the 
engineer, indicating a rough, banca-like craft nearly sixteen 
feet long, which had been carved and scraped and burned 
out of a single log. 

He helped Beatrice in, then cast off the rope. In the 
bottom lay six paddles of the most degraded state of workmanship. They showed no trace of decoration whatsoever, 
and the lowest savages of the pre-cataclysmic era had invar


CONSUMMATION 163 

iably attempted some crude form of art on nearly every 
implement. 

The girl took up one of the paddles. 

" Which way ? Up-stream ? " asked she. " No, no, you 
mustn't even try to use that arm." 

" Why paddle at all ? " Stem answered. " See here." 

He pointed where a short and crooked mast lay, unstepped, 
along the side. Lashed to it was a sail of rawhides, clumsily caught together with thongs, heavy and stiff, yet full 
of prcHnise. 

Stem laughed. 

''Back to the coracle stage again," said he. ''Back to 
Caesar's time, and way beyond ! " And he lifted one end of 
the mast. " Here we've got the Seuvian pellis pro veliSg 
the ' skins for sails ' all over again  only more so. Wdl, 
no matter. Up she goes ! " 

Together they stepped the mast and spread the sail. The 
engineer took his place in the stem, a paddle in his left 
hand. He dipped it, and the ripples glinted away. 

" Now," said he, in a voice that left no room for argu 
ment, " now, you curl up in the tiger-skin and go to sleep ! 
This is my job." 

The sail caught the breath of the breeze. The banca 
moved slowly forward, trailing its wake like widening lines 
of silver in the moonlight. 

And Beatrice, strong in her tmst of him, her confidence 
and love, lay down to sleep while the wounded man steered 
on and on, and watched her and protected her. And over all 
the stars, a glory in the summer sky, kept silent vigil. 

Dawn broke, all a flame of gold and crimson, as they 
landed in a sheltered little bay on the west shore. 

Here, though the forest stood unbroken in thick ranges 
all along the background, it had not yet invaded the slope 
that led back from the pebbly beach. And through die 
tangle of what once must have been a splendid orchard, 
they caught a glimpse of white walls oveigrown with a 
mad profusion of wild roses, wistarias and coltunbines. 




i64 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

' This was once upon a time the summer-place, the big 
concrete bungalow and all, of Harrison Van Amburg. You 
know the billionaire, the wheat man? It used to be all 
his in the long ago. He built it for all time of a material 
that time can never change. It was his. Well, it's ours now. 
Our home ! " 

Together they stood upon the shelving beach, lapped by 
the river. Somewhere in the woods behind them a robin 
was caroling with liquid harmony. 

Stem drew the rude boat up. Then, breathing deep, he 
faced the morning. 

" You and I, Beatrice," said he, and took her hand. 
" Just you and I ! " 

" And love ! " she whispered. 

"And hope, and life! And the earth reborn. The arts 
and sciences, language and letters, truth, all the glories 
of the world ' handed down through us ! 

" Listen ! The race of men, our race, must live again  
shall live! Again the forests and the plains shall be the 
conquest of our blood. Once more shall cities gleam and 
tower, ships sail the sea, and the world go on to greater 
wisdom, better things! 

" A kinder and a saner world this time. No misery, no 
war, no poverty, woe, strife, creeds, oppression, tears  for 
we are wiser than those other folk, and there shall be no 



error." 



He paused, his face irradiate. To him recurred the prophecy of Ingersoll, the greatest orator of that other time. 
And very slowly he spoke again: 

" Beatrice, it shall be a world where thrones have crumbled 
and where kings are dust. The aristocracy of idleness shall 
reign no more! A world without a slave. Man shall at 
last be free! 

" ' A world at peace, adorned by every form of art, with 
music's myriad voices thrilled, while lips are rich with 
words of love and truth. A world in which no exile sighs. 



CONSUMMATION 165 

no prisoner mourns ; a world on which the gibbet's shadow 
shall not fall. 

' ' A race without disease of flesh or brain, shapely and 
fair, the wedded harmony of form and function. And as 
I look, life lengthens, joy deepens, and over all in the great 
dome shines the eternal star of human hope ! ' " 

" And love ? " she smiled again, a deep and sacred meaning in her words. Within her stirred the universal motherhood, the hope of everything, the call of the unborn, the 
insistent voice of the race that was to be. 

" And love ! " he answered, his voice now very tender, 
very grave. 

Tired, yet strong, he looked upon her. And as he looked 
his eyes grew deep and eager. 

Sweet as the honey of Hymettus was the perfume of 
the orchard, all a powder of white and rosy blooms, among 
which the bees, pollen-dusted, labored, at their joyous, 
fructifying task. Fresh, the morning breeze. Qear, warm, 
radiant, the sun of June; the simimer sun uprising far 
beyond the shining hills. 

Life everywhere  and love! 

Love, too, for them. For this man, this woman, love; 
the mystery, the pleasure and the eternal pain. 

With his unhurt arm he circled her. He bent, he drew 
her to him, as she raised her face to his. 

And for the first time his mouth sought hers. 

Their lips, long hungry for this madness, met there and 
blended in a kiss of passion and of joy. 



BOOK II 



BEYOND THE GREAT OBLIVION 



CHAPTER I 

BEGINNINGS 

A THOUSAND years of darkness and decay! A thousand 
years of blight, brutality, and atavism; of Nature overwhelming all man's work, of crumbling cities and of forgotten civilization, of stupefaction, of death! A thousand 
years of night! 

Two himian beings, all alone in that vast wilderness  a 
wcmian and a man. 

The past, irrevocable; the present, fraught with problems, perils, and alarms; the future  what? 

A thousand years! 

Yet, though this thousand years had seemingly smeared 
away all semblance of the world of men from the cosmic 
canvas, Allan Stern and Beatrice Kendrick thrilled with as 
vital a passion as though that vast, oblivious age lay not 
between them and the time that was. 

And their long kiss, there in sight of their new home-to-bc 
 alone there in that desolated world  was as natural as the 
summer breeze, the liquid melody of the red-breast on the 
blossomy apple-bough above their heads, the white and purple spikes of odorous lilacs along the vine-grown stone wall, 
the gold and purple dawn no\ breaking over the distant 
reaches of the river. 

Thus were these two betrothed, this sole surviving pair 
of human beings. 

Thus, as the new day burned to living flame up the 
inverted bowl of sky, this woman and this man pledged each 
other their love and loyalty and trust. 

Thus they stood together, his left arm about her warm, 

169 




i;o DARKNESS AND DAWN 

lithe body, clad as she was only in her tigerskin. Their 
eyes met and held true, there in the golden glory of the 
dawn. Unafraid, she read the message in the depths of his, 
the invitation, the command; and they both foreknew the 
future. 

Beatrice spoke first, flushing a little as she drew toward 
him. 

" Allan," she said with infinite tenderness, even as a 
mother might speak to a well-loved son, " Allan, come now 
and let me dress your wound. That's die first thing to do. 
Come, let me see your arm." 

He smiled a little, and with his broad, brown hand stroked 
back the spun silk of her hair, its mass transfixed by the 
raw gold pins he had found for her among the ruins of 
New York. 

"No, no!" he objected. "It's nothing  it's not worth 
bothering about. I'll be all right in a day or two. My flesh 
heals almost at once, without any care. You don't realize 
how healthy I am." 

I know, dear, but it must hurt you terribly ! " 
Hurt? How could I feel any pain with your kiss on 
my mouth ? " 

" Come ! " she again repeated with insistence, and pointed 
toward the beach where their banca lay on the sand. 

" Come, I'll dress your wound first. And after I find 
out just how badly you're injured  " 

He tried to stop her mouth with kisses, but she evaded 
him. 

" No, no ! " she cried. " Not nownot now ! " 

Allan had to cede. And now presently there he knelt on 
the fine white sand, his bearskin robe opened and flung 
back, his well-knit shoulder and sinewed arm bare and 
brown. 

" Well, is it fatal? " he jested. " How long do you give 
me to survive it ? " as with her hand and the cold limpid 
water of the Hudson she started to lave the caked blood 
away from his gashed triceps. 






BEGINNINGS 171 

Kt sigfat of the wound she looked grave, but made no 
comment She had no bandages; but with the woodland 
dcill she had developed in the past weeks of life in close 
touch with nature, she bound the cleansed wound with 
cooling leaves and fastened them securely in place 3ith 
lashings of leather thongs from the banca. 

Presently the task was done. Stern slipped his bear 
skin back in place. Beatrice, still solicitous, tried to da 
the silver buckle that held it; but he, unable to restrain 
himself, caught her hand in both of his and crushed it to 
his lips. 

Then he took her perfect face between his palms, and for 
a long moment studied it. He looked at her waving hair, 
luxuriant and glinting rich brown gleams in the sunlight; 
her thick, arched brows and hazel eyes, liquid and full of 
mystery as woodland pools; her skin, sun-browned and 
satiny, with abundant tides of life-blood coursing vigorously 
in its warm flush ; her ripe lips. He studied her, and loved 
and yearned toward her ; and in him the passion leaped up 
like living flames. 

His mouth met hers again. 

" My beloved ! " breathed he. 

Her rounded arm, bare to the shoulder, circled his neck ; 
she hid her face in his breast. 

" Not yet  not yet ! " she whispered. 

On the white and pink flowered bough above, the robin, 
unafraid, gushed into a very madness of golden song. And 
now the sun, higher risen, had struck the river into a 
broad sheet of spun metal, over which the swallows  even 
as in the olden days  darted and spiraled, with now and 
then a flick and dash of spray. 

Far off, wool-white winding-sheets of mist were lifting, 
lagging along the purple hills, clothed with inviolate forest. 

Again the man tried to raise her head, to bum his kisses 
on her mouth. But she, instilled with the eternal spirit 
of woman, denied him. 

" No, not now  not yet ! " she said ; and in her eyes be 




172 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

read her meaning. ''You must let me go now, Allan. 
There's so much to do; we've got to be practical, you know." 

" Practical 1 When I I love" 

" Yes, I know, dear. But there's so much to be done 
first." Her womanly homemaking instinct would not be 
gainsaid. " There's so much work 1 We've got the place 
to explore, and the house to put in order, and  oh, thousands of things I And we must be very sensible and very 
wise, you and I, boy. We're not children, you know. Now 
that we've lost our home in the Metropolitan Tower, everything's got to be done over again." 

" Except to learn to love you ! " answered Stem, letting 
her go with reluctance. 

She laughed back at him over her fur-clad shoulder as 
her sandaled feet followed the dim remnants of what 
must once have been a broad driveway from the river road 
along the beach, leading up to the bungalow. 

Through the encroaching forest and the tangle of the 
degenerate apple-trees they could see the concrete walls, 
with here or there a bit of white still gleaming through the 
enlacements of ancient vines that had enveloped the whole 
structure  woodbine, ivy, wistarias, and the maddest jungle of climbing roses, red and yellow, that ever made a 
nest for love. 

" Wait, I'll go first and clear the way for you," he said 
cheerily. His big bulk crashed down the undergrowth. His 
hands held back the thorns and briers and the whipping 
hardbacks. Together they slowly made way toward the 
house. 

The orchard had lost all semblance of regularity, for 
in the thousand years since the hand of man had pruned 
or cared for it Mother Nature had planted and replanted 
it times beyond counting. Small and gnarled and crooked 
the trees were, as the spine-tree souls in Dante's dolorosa 
selva. 




BEGINNINGS 173 

Here or there a pine had rooted and grown tall, killing 
the lesser tribe of green things underneath. 

Warm lay the sun there. A pleasant carpet of last year's 
leaves and pine-spills covered the earth. 

"It's all ready and waiting for us, all embowered and 
carpeted for love," said Allan musingly. " I wonder what 
old Van Amburg would think of his estate if he could see 
it now? And what would he say to our having it? You 
know. Van was pretty ugly to me at one time about my 
political opinion  but that's all past and forgotten now. 
Only this is certainly an odd turn of fate." 

He helped the girl over a fallen log, rotted with moss and 
lichens. " It's one awful mess, sure as you're born. But 
as quick as my arm gets back into shape, we'll have order 
out of chaos before you know it. Some fine day you and I 
will drive our sixty horse-power car up an asphalt road 
here, and  " 

"A car? Why, what do you mean? There's not such 
a thing left in the whole world as a car ! " 

The engineer tapped his forehead with his finger. 

" Oh, yes, there is. I've got several models right here. 
You just wait till you see the workshop I'm going to install 
on the bank of the river with current-power, and with an 
electric light plant for the whole place, and with  " 

Beatrice laughed. 

" You dear, big, dreaming boy ! " she interrupted. Then 
with a kiss she took his hand. 

" Come," said she. " We're home now. And there's 
work to do." 




CHAPTER n 

SETTLING DOWN 

Together, in the comradeship of love and trust and mutual 
understanding, they reached the somewhat open space before the bungalow, where once the road had ended in a 
stone-paved drive. Allan's wounded arm, had he but sensed 
it, was beginning to pain more than a little. But he was 
oblivious. His love, the fire of spring that burned in his 
blood, the lure of this great adventuring, banished all consciousness of ill. 

Parting a thicket, they reached the steps. And for a 
while they stood there, hand in hand, silent and thrilled 
with vast, strange thoughts, dreaming of what must be. In 
their eyes lay mirrored the future of the human race. 
The light that glowed in them evoked the glories of the 
dawn of life again, after ten centuries of black oblivion. 

" Our home now ! " he told her, very gently, and again 
he kissed her, but this time on the forehead. " Ours when 
we shall have reclaimed it and made it ours. See the 
yellow roses, dear? They symbolize our golden future. 
The red, red roses ? Our passion and our pain ! " 

The girl made no answer, but tears gathered in her eyes 
 tears from the deepest wells of the soul. She brought 
his hand to her lips. 

" Ours ! " she whispered tremblingly. 

They stood there together for a little space, silent and 
glad. From an oak that shaded the porch a squirrel chippered at them. A sparrow  larger now than the sparrows 
they remembered in the time that was  peered out at them, 

174 




SETTLING DOWN 175 

wondering but unafraid, from its nest under the eaves; at 
them, the first humans it had ever seen. 

" We've got a tenant already, haven't we ? " smiled Allan. 
" Well, I guess we sha'n't have to disturb her, unless perhaps for a while, when I cut away this poison ivy here." 
He pointed at the glossy triple leaf. " No poisonous thing, 
whether plant, snake, spider, or insect, is going to stay 
in this Eden ! " he concluded, with a laugh. 

Together, with a strange sense of violating the spirit of 
the past, they went up the concrete steps, imtrodden now 
by hmnan feet for ten centuries. 

The massive blocks were still intact for the most part, 
for old Van Amburg had builded with endless care and with 
no remotest regard for cost. Here a vine, there a sapling 
had managed to insinuate a tap-root in some crack made 
by the frost, but the damage was trifling. Except for the 
falling of a part of a cornice, the building was complete. But 
it was hidden in vines and mold. Moss, lichens and weeds 
grew on the steps, flourishing in the detritus that had accumulated. 

Allan dug the toe of his sandal into the loose drift of 
dead leaves and pine-spills that littered the broad piazza. 

" It'll need more than a vacuum cleaner to put this in 
shape ! " said he. " Well, the sooner we get at it, the better. 
We'd do well to take a look at the inside." 

The front door, one-time built of oaken planks studded 
with hand-worked nails and banded with huge wroughtiron hinges, now hung there a mere shell of itself, wormeaten, crumbling, disintegrated. 

With no tools but his naked hands Stem tore and battered it away. A thick, pungent haze of dust arose, yellow 
in the morning sunlight that presently, for the first time in 
a thousand years, fell warm and bright across the cobwebbed front hallway, through the aperture. 

Room by room Allan and Beatrice explored. The bungalow was practically stripped bare by time. 

Only moth and rust," sighed the girl. 'The same 



M 



i 




176 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

story everywhere we go. But  well, never mind. We'll 
soon have it looking homelike. Make me a broom, dear, 
and ril sweep out the worst of it at once." 

Talking now in terms of practical detail, with romance 
for the hour displaced by harsh reality, they examined the 
entire house. 

Of the once magnificent furnishings, only dust-piles, 
splinters and punky rubbish remained. Through the rotted 
plank shutters, that hung drunkenly awry from rust-eaten 
hinges, long spears of sunlight wanly illuminated the wreck 
of all that had once been the lavish home of a billionaire. 

Rugs, paintings, furniture, bibelots, treasures of all kinds 
now lay commingled in mournful decay. In what had 
evidently been the music room, overlooking the grounds to 
southward, the grand piano now was only a mass of rusted 
frame, twisted and broken fragments of wire and a considerable heap of wood-detritus, with a couple of corroded 
pedals buried in the pile. 

 And this was the famous hundred-thousand-dollar harp 
of Sara, his daughter, that the papers used to talk so much 
about, you remember?" asked the girl, stirring with her 
foot a few mournful bits of rubbish that lay near the 
piano. 

' Sic transit gloria mundi! ' growled Stern, shaking his 
head. "You and she were the same age, almost. And 



now  " 



Silent and full of strange thoughts they went on into 
what had been the kitchen. The stove, though heavily 
bedded in rust, retained its form, for the solid steel had 
resisted even the fearful lapse of vanished time. 

" After I scour that with sand and water," said Stem, 
'' and polish up these aluminum utensils and reset that broken 
pane with a piece of glass from up-stairs where it isn't 
needed, you won't know this place. Yes, and I'll have 
running water in here, too  and electricity from the powerplant, and  " 

"Oh, Allan," interrupted the girl, delightedly, "this 



SETTLING DOWN 177 

must have been the dining room/' She beckoned from a 
doorway. " No end of dishes left for us I Isn't it jolly? 
This is luxury compared to the way we had to start in the 
tower ! " 

In the dinit-room a good number of the more solid cutglass and china pieces had resisted the shock of having fallen, centuries ago, to the floor, when the shelves and cupboards of teak and mahogany had rotted and gone to pieces. 
Corroded silverware lay scattered all about; and there 
was gold plate, too, intact save for the patina of extreme 
age  platters, dishes, beakers. But of the table and the 
chairs, nothing remained save dust. 

Like curious children they poked and pried. 

" Dishes enough ! " exclaimed she. . " Gold, till you can't 
rest. But how about something to put on the dishes ? We 
haven't had a bite since yesterday noon, and I'm about 
starved. Now that the fighting's all over, I begin to remember my healthy appetite ! " 

Stem smiled. 

" You'll have some breakfast, girlie," promised he. 
"There'll be the wherewithal to garnish our i8-k, never 
fear. Just let's have a look up-stairs, and then I'll go after 
something for the larder." 

They left the down-stairs rooms, silent save for a fly 
buzzing in a spider's web, and together ascended the dusty 
stairs. The railing was entirely gone; but the concrete 
steps remained. 

Stem helped the girl, in spite of the twinge of pain it 
caused his wounded arm. His heart beat faster  so, too, 
did hers  as they gained the upper story. The touch of 
her was, to him, like a lighted match flung into a powder 
magazine; but he bit his lip, and though his face paled, 
then flushed, he held his voice steady as he said: 

" So then, bats up here? Well, how the deuce do they 
get in and out? Ah! That broken window, where the 
elm-branch has knocked out the glass  I seel That's got 
to be fixed at once I " 




178 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

He brushed webs and dust from the remaining panes, 
and together they peered out over the orchard, out across 
the river, now a broad sheet of molten gold. His arm went 
about her; he drew her head against his heart, fast-beating; 
and silence fell. 

" Come, Allan," said the girl at length, calmer than he. 
" Let's see what we've got here to do with. Oh, I tell you 
to begin with," and she smiled up frankly at him, " I'm a 
tremendously practical sort of woman. You may be an 
engineer, and know how to build wireless telegraphs and 
bridges and  and things ; but when it comes to home-build 
mg 

" I admit it. Well, lead on," he answered ; and together 
they explored the upper rooms. The sense of intimacy 
now lay strong upon them, of unity and of indissoluble love 
and comradeship. This was quite another venture than 
the exploration of the tower, for now they were choosing 
a home, their home, and in them the mating instinct had 
begun to thrill, to burn. 

Each room, despite its ruin and decay, took on a special 
charm, a dignity, the foreshadowing of what must be. Yet 
instrinsically the place was mournful, even after Stem 
had let the sunshine in. 

For all was dark desolation. The rosewood and mahogany furniture, pictures, rugs, brass beds, all alike lay reduced 
to dust and ashes. A gold clock, the porcelain ttings of 
the bath-room, and some fine clay and meerschaum pipes in 
what had evidently been Van Amburg's den  these constituted all that had escaped the tooth of time. 

In a front room that probably had been Sara's, a mudswallow had built its nest in the far comer. It flew out, 
frightened, when Stern thmst his hand into the aperture to 
see if the nest were tenanted, fluttered about with scared 
cries, then vanished up the broad fireplace. 

" Eggs  warm I " announced Stem.  Well, this room 
will have to be shut up and left. We've got more than 
enough, anyhow. Less work for you, dear," he added, with 



SETTLING DOWN 179 

a smile. " We might use only the lower floor, if you like. 
I don't want you killing yourself with housework, you 
understand." 

She laughed cheerily. 

" You make me a broom and get all the dishes and things 
together," she answered, " and then leave the rest to me. 
In a week from now you won't know this place. Once we 
clear out a little foothold here we can go back to the tower 
and fetch up a few loads of tools and supplies  " 

" Come on, come on ! " he interrupted, taking her by the 
hand and leading her away. " All such planning will do 
after breakfast, but Tm starving! How about a five-pound 
bass on the coals, eh? Come on, let's go fishing." 




CHAPTER III 



THE MASKALONGE 



With characteristic resourcefulness Stein soon manufactured adequate tackle with a well-trimmed alder pole, a line 
of leather thongs and a hook of stout piano wire, properly 
bent to make a barb and rubbed to a fine point on a stone. 
He caught a dozen young frogs among the sedges in the 
marshy stretch at the north end of the landing-beach, and 
confined them in the only available receptacle, the holster 
of his automatic. 

All this hurt his arm severely, but he paid no heed. 

" Now," he announced, ' we're quite ready for business. 
Come along ! " 

Together they pushed the boat oflf; it glided smoothly 
out onto the breast of the great current. 

" ril paddle," she volunteered. " You mustn't, with your 
arm in the condition it is. Which way ? " 

" Up  over there into that cove beyond the point," he 
answered, baiting up his hook with a frog that kicked as 
naturally as though a full thousand years hadn't passed 
since any of its progenitors had been handled thus. " This 
certainly is far from being the kind of tackle that Bob Davis or any of that gang used to swear by, but it's the best 
we can do for now. When I get to making lines and hooks 
and things in earnest, there'll be some sport in this vicinity. 
Imagine water untouched by the angler for ten hundred 
years or more I " 

He swung his clumsy line as he spoke, and cast. Far 
across the shining water the circles spread, silver in the 

i8o 




THE MASKALONGE i8i 

mcMming light; then the trailing line cut a long series of 
V's as the girl paddled slowly toward the cove. Bdiind 
the banca a rippling wake flashed metallic; the cold, clear 
water caressed the primitive hull, murmuring with soft 
cadences, in the old, familiar music of the time when there 
were men on earth. The witchery of it stirred Beatrice; 
she smiled, looked up with joy and wonder at the beauty 
of that perfect morning, and in her clear voice began to 
sing, very low, very softly, to herself, a song whereof  
save in her brain  no memory now remained m the whole 
world  

" Stark wie der Fels, 

Tief wie das Meer, 

Muss deine Liebe, muss deine Liebe sein  ' 

''Ah!' cried the man, interrupting her. 

The alder pole was jerking, quivering in his hands; the 
leather line was taut. 

" A strike, so help me ! A big one I " 

He sprang to his feet, and, unmindful of the swaying 
of the banca, began to play the fish. 

Beatrice, her eyes a-sparkle, turned to watch ; the paddle 
lay forgotten in her hands. 

"Here he comes! Oh, damn!" shouted Stem. "If I 
only had a reel now  ' 

" Pull him right in, can't you ? " the girl suggested. 

He groaned, between clenched teeth  for the strain on 
his arm was torture. 

" Yes, and have him break the line ! " he cried. " There 
he goes, under the boat, now! Paddle! Go ahead  
paddle ! " 

She seized the oar, and while Stem fought the monster 
she set the banca in motion again. Now the fish was leaping wildly from side to side, zig-zagging, shaking at the 
book as a bull-dog shakes an old boot. The leather cord 
hummed through the water, ripping and vibrating, taut as 



t 




182 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

a fiddle-string. A long, silvery line of bubbles followed the 
vibrant cord. 

Flash! 

High in air, lithe and graceful and very swift, a spurt 
of green and white  a long, slim curve of glistening power 
 a splash; and again the cord drew hard. 

" Maskalonge ! " Stern cried. " Oh, weVe got to land 
him  got to ! Fifteen pounds if he's an ounce ! " 

Beatrice, flushed and eager, watched the fight with fascination. 

"If I can bring him close, you strike  hit hard!" the 
man directed. " Give it to him ! He's our breakfast ! " 

Even in the excitement of the battle Stern realized hov 
very beautiful this woman was. Her color was adorable 
 rose-leaves and cream. Her eyes were shot full of light 
and life and the joy of living; her loosened hair, wavy and 
rich and brown, half hid the graceful curve of her neck as 
she leaned to watch, to help him. 

And strong determination seized him to master this great 
fish, to land it, to fling it at the woman's feet as his tribute 
and his trophy. 

He had, in the days of long ago, fished in the Adirondack 
wildernesses. He had fished for tarpon in the Gulf; he 
had cast the fly along the brooks of Maine and lured the 
small-mouthed bass with floating bait on many a lake and 
stream. He had even fished in Zi Rocky Mountain torrent, 
and out on the far Columbia, when failure to succeed meant 
hunger. 

But this experience was unique. Never had he fished all 
alone in the world with a loved woman who depended on 
his skill for her food, her life, her everything. 

Forgotten now the wounded arm, the crude and absurd 
implements ; forgotten everything but just that sole, indomitable thought : " I've got to win ! " 

Came now a lull in the struggles of the monster. Sterr 
hauled in. Another rush, met by a paying-out, a gradui 
tautening of the line, a strong and steady pull. 




THE MASKALONGE 183 

' He's tiring," exulted Stem. " Be ready when I bring 
him close ! ' 

Again the fish broke cover; again it dived; but now its 
strength was lessening fast. 

Allan hauled in. 

Now, far down in the clear depths, they could both see 
the darting, flickering shaft of white and green. 

" Up he comes now ! Give it to him, hard I " 

As Stem brought him to the surface, Beatrice struck 
with the paddle  once, twice, with magnificent strength and 
judgment. 

Over the gunwale of the banca, in a sparkle of flying 
spray, silvery in the morning sun, the maskalonge gleanied. 

Excited and happy as a child, Beatrice clapped her hands. 
Stem seized the paddle as she let it fall. A moment later 
the huge fish, stunned and dying, lay in the bottom of the 
boat, its gills rising, falling in convulsive gasps, its body 
quivering, scales shining in the sunlight  a thing of wondrous beauty, a promise of the feast for two strong, healthy 
humans. 

Stem dried his brow on the back of his hand and drew 
a deep breath, for the morning was already warm and the 
labor had been hard. 

" Now," said he, and smiled,  now a nice little pile of 
dead wood on the beach, a curl of birch-bark and a handful of pine punk and grass  a touch of the flint and steel ! 
Then this/' and he pointed at the maskalonge, "broiled 
on a pointed stick, with a handful of checkerberries for 
dessert, and I think you and I will be about ready to begin 
work in earnest ! " 

He knelt and kissed her  a kiss that she returned  and 
then, slowly, happily, and filled with the joy of comradeship, they drove their banca once more to the white and 
gleaming beach. 




CHAPTER ly 

THE GOLDEN AGE 

Stern's plans of hard work for the immediate present had 
to be deferred a little, for in spite of his perfect health, 
the spear-thrust in his arm  lacking the proper treatment, 
and irritated by his labor in catching the big fish developed 
swelling and soreness. A little fever even set in the second 
day. And though he was eager to go out fishing again, 
Beatrice appointed herself his nurse and guardian, and 
withheld permission. 

They lived for some days on the excellent flesh of the 
maskalonge, on clams from the beach  enormous clams of 
delicious flavor  on a new fruit with a pinkish meat, which 
grew abundantly in the thickets and somewhat resembled 
breadfruit ; on wild asparagus-sprouts, and on the few squirrels that Stem was able to "pot" with his revolver from 
the shelter of the leafy little camping-place they had arranged near the river. 

Though Beatrice worked many hours all alone in the 
bungalow, sweeping it with a broom made of twigs lashed 
to a pole, and trying to bring the place into order, it was 
still no fit habitation. 

She would not even let the man try to help her, but 
insisted on his keeping quiet in their camp. This lay under 
the shelter of a thick-foliaged oak at the southern end of 
the beach. The perfect weather and the presence of a threequarters moon at night invited them to sleep out under 
the sky. 

" There'll be plenty of time for the bungalow," she said, 

184 



THE GOLDEN AGE 185 

'whcn it rains. As long as we have fair June weather 
like this no roof shall cover me ! " 

Singularly enough, there were no mosquitoes. In the 
thousand years that had elapsed, they might either have 
shifted their habitat from eastern America, or else some obscure evolutionary process might have wiped them out 
entirely. At any rate, none existed, for which the two 
adventurers gave thanks. 

Wild beasts they feared not. Though now and then they 
heard the yell of a wildcat far back in the woods, or the 
tramping of an occasional bulk through the forest, and 
though once a cinnamon bear poked his muzzle out into the 
clearing, sniifed and departed with a grunt of disapproval, 
they could not bring themselves to any realization of animak 
as a real peril. Their camp-fire burned' high all night, 
heaped with driftwood and windfalls ; and beyond this protection, Stern had his automatic and a belt nearly full of 
cartridges. They discussed the question of a possible attack by some remnants of the Horde; but common sense 
assured them that these creatures would  such as survived 
 give them a wide berth. 

" And in any event,' Stem summed it up, " if anything 
happens, we have the bungalow to retreat into. Though 
in its present state, without any doors or shutters, I think 
we're safer out among the trees, where, on a pinch, we 
could go aloft." 

Thus his convalescence progressed in the open air, under 
the clouds and sun and stars and lustrous moon of that 
deserted world. 

Beatrice showed both skill and ingenuity in her treatment. With a clam-shell she scraped and saved the rich 
fat from under the skins of the squirrels, and this she 
" tried out " in a golden dish, over the fire. The oil thus 
got she used to anoint his healing wound. She used a 
dressing of clay and leaves; and when the fever flushed 
him she made him comfortable on his bed of spnice-tips, 
bathed his forehead and cheeks, and gave him cold water 



f 




i86 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

from a spring that trickled down over the moss some fifty 
feet to westward of the camp. 

Many a long talk they had, too  he prone on the spruce, 
she sitting beside him, tending the fire, holding his hand 
or letting his head lie in her lap, the while she stroked his 
hair. Ferns, flowers in profusion  lilacs and clover and 
climbing roses and some new, strange scarlet blossoms  
bowered their nest. And through the pain and fever, the 
delay and disappointment, they both were glad and cheerful. No word of impatience or haste or repining escaped 
them. For they had life; they had each other; they had 
love. And those days, as later they looked back upon 
them, were among the happiest, the most purely beautiful, 
the sweetest of their whole wondrous, strange experience. 

He and she, perfect friends, comrades and lovers, were 
inseparable. Each was always conscious of the other's 
presence. The continuity of love, care and sympathy was 
never broken. Even when, at daybreak, she went away 
around the wooded point for her bath in the river, he 
could hear her splashing and singing and laughing happily 
in the cold water. 

It was the Golden Age come back to earth again  the 
age of natural and pure simplicity, truth, trust, honor, 
faith and joy, unspoiled by malice or deceit, by lies, conventions, sordid ambitions, or the lust of wealth or power. 
Arcady, at last  in truth! 

Their conversation was of many things. They talked 
of their awakening in the tower and their adventures there ; 
of the possible cause of the world-catastrophe that had 
wiped out the human race, save for their own survival; 
the Horde and the geat battle; their escape, their present 
condition, and their probable future ; the possibility of their 
ever finding any other isolated human beings, and of reconstituting the fragments of the world or of renewing 
the human race. 

And as they spoke of this, sometimes the girl would 
grow strangely silent, and a look almost of inspiration  the 







THE GOLDEN AGE 187 

universal mother-look of the race  would fill her wondrous 
eyes". Her hand would tremble in his; but he would hold 
it tight, for he, too, understood. 

Afraid, little girl ? " he asked her once. 

No, not afraid," she answered; and their eyes met. 

Only  so much depends on us  on you, on me! What 
strength we two must have, what courage, what endurance ! 
The future of the human race lies in our hands ! " 

He made no answer; he, too, grew silent. And for a 
long while they sat and watched the embers of the fire; 
and the day waned. Slowly the sun set in its glory over the 
virgin hills; the far eastern spaces of the sky grew bathed 
in tender lavenders and purples. Haze drew its veils across 
the world, and the air grew brown with evenfall. 

Presently the girl arose, to throw more wood on the fire. 
Qad only in her loose tiger-skin, clasped with gold, she 
moved like a primeval goddess. Stern marked the supple 
play of her muscles, the unspoiled grace and strength of 
that young body, the swelling warmth of her bosom. And 
as he looked he loved ; he pressed a hand to his eyes ; for 
a while he thought  it was as though he prayed. 

Evening came on  the warm, dark, mysterious night. 
Off there in the shallows gradually arose the million-voiced 
chorus of frogs, shrill and monotonous, plaintive, appealing  the cry of new life to the overarching, implacable 
mystery of the universe. The first faint silvery powder 
of the stars came spangling out along the horizon. Unsteady bats began to reel across the sky. The solemn beauty 
of the scene awed the woman and the man to silence. But 
Stern, leaning his back against the bole of the great oak, 
encircled Beatrice with his arm. 

Her beautiful dear head rested in the hollow of his throat; 
her warm, fragrant hair caressed his cheek; he felt the 
wholesome strength and sweetness of this woman whom he 
loved; and in his eyes  unseen by her  tears welled and 
gleamed in the firelight. 

Beatrice watched, like a contented child, the dancing 




i88 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

showers of sparks that rose, wavering and whirling in complex sarabands  sparks red as passion, golden as the unknown future of their dreams. From the river they heard 
the gentle lap-lap-lapping of the waves along the shore. 
All was rest and peace and beauty; this was Eden once 
again  and there was no serpent to enter in. 

Presently Stem spoke. 

" Dear," said he, " do you know, Fm a bit puzzled in 
some ways, about  well, about night and day, and temperature, and gravitation, and a number of little things 
like that. Puzzled. We're facing problems here that we 
don't realize fully as yet." 

" Problems ? What problems, except to make our home, 
and  and live?" 

" No, there's more to be considered than just that. In 
the first place, although I have no timepiece, Fm moderately 
certain the day and night are shorter now than they used 
to be before the smash-up. There must be a difference of 
at least half an hour. Just as soon as I can get around to 
it, Fll build a clock, and see. Though if the force of gravity has changed, too, that, of course, will change the time 
of vibration of any pendulum, and so of course will invalidate my results. It's a hard problem, right enough." 

" You think gravitation has changed ? " 

" Don't you notice, yourself, that things seem a trifle 
lighter  things that used to be heavy to lift are now comparatively easy ? " 

" M-m'tn-m-m  I don't know. I thought maybe it was 
because I was feeling so much stronger, with this new kind 
of outdoor life." 

" Of course, that's worth considering," answered Stem, 
' but there5 more in it than that. The world is certainly 
smaller than it was, though how, or why, I can't say. 
Things are lighter, and the time of rotation is shorter. 
Another thing, the pole-star is certainly five degrees out of 
place. The axis of the earth has been given an astonishing 
twist, some way or other. 



THE GOLDEN AGE 189 

 And don't you notice a distinct change in the climate? 
In the old days there were none of these huge, pabn-like 
ferns growing in this part of the world. We had no such 
gorgeous butterflies. And look at the new varieties of 
flowers  and the breadfruit, or whatever it is, growing on 
the banks of the Hudson in the early part of June ! 

" Scmiething, I tell you, has happened to the earth, in 
all these centuries ; something big ! Maybe the cause of it 
all was the original catastrophe ; who knows ? It's up to us 
to find out. We've got more to do than make our home, 
and live, and hunt for other people  if any are still alive. 
We've got to solve these world-problems; we've got work 
to do, little girl. Work  big work ! " 

" Well, youVe got to rest now, anyhow," she dictated. 
" Now, stop thinking and planning, and just rest ! Till your 
wound is healed, you're going to keep good and quiet." 

Silence fell again between them. Then, as the east brightened with the approach of the moon, she sang the song he 
loved best  " Ave Maria, Gratia Plena "  in her soft, sweet 
voice, untrained, unspoiled by false conventions. And 
Stem, listening, forgot his problems and his plans; peace 
came to his soul, and rest and joy. 

The song ended. And now the moon, with a silent 
majesty that shamed human speech, slid her bright silver 
plate up behind the fret of trees on the far hills. Across 
the river a shimmering path of light grew, broadening; and 
the world beamed in holy beauty, as on the primal night. 

And their souls drank that beauty. They were glad, as 
never yet. At last Stern spoke. 

" It's more like a dream than a reality, isn't it ? " said 
he. " Too wonderful to be true. Makes me think of Alfred de Musset's  Lucie.' You remember the poem? 

" ' Un sair, nous etiotis seuls, 
Jetais assis prts d'elle . . .'" 

Beatrice nodded. 

" Yes, I know ! '' she whispered. " How could I forget 




igo DARKNESS AND DAWN 

it? And to think that for a thousand years the moon's 
been shining just the same, and nobody  " 

" Yes, but is it the same ? " interrupted Stem suddenly, 
his practical turn of mind always reasserting itself. " Don't 
you see a difference? You remember the old-time face in 
the moon, of course. Where is it now ? The moon always 
presented only one side, the same side, to us in the old days. 
How about it now? If I'm not mistaken, things have 
shifted up there. We're looking now at some other face 
of it. And if that's so it means a far bigger disarrangement of the solar system and the earth's orbit and lots of 
things than you or I suspect! 

"Wait till we get back to New York for half a day, 
and visit the tower and gather up our things. Wait till I 
get hold of my binoculars again! Perhaps some of these 
questions may be resolved. We can't go on this way, surrounded by perpetual puzzles, problems, mysteries! We 
must  " 

"Do nothing but rest now!" she dictated with mock 
severity. 

Stern laughed. 

" Well, you're the boss," he answered, and leaned back 
against the oak. "Only, may I propound one more 
question ? " 

"Well, what is it?" 

" Do you see that dark patch in the sky ? Sort of a roughly 
circular hole in the blue, as it were  right there?" He 
pointed. " Where there aren't any stars? " 

" Why yes. What about it? " 

" It's moving, that's all. Every night that black patch 
moves among the stars, and cuts their light off; and one 
night it grazed the moon  passed before the eastern limb 
of it, you understand. Made a partial eclipse. You were 
asleep; I didn't bother you about it. But if there's a new 
body in the sky, it's up to us to know why, and what about 
it, and all. So the quicker  " 

" The quicker you get well, the better all around ! " 



THE GOLDEN AGE 191 

She drew his head down and kissed him tenderly on the 
forehead with that strange, innate maternal instinct which 
makes women love to " mother " men even ten years older 
than themselves. 

" Don't you worry your brains about all these problems 
and vexations to-night, Allan. Your getting well is the 
main thing. The whole world's future hangs on just that ! 
Do you realize what it means ? Do you ? " 

" Yes, as far as the human brain can realize so big a 
concept. Languages, arts, science, all must be handed down 
to the race by us. The world can't begin again on any 
higher plane than just the level of our collective intelligence. All that the world knows to-day is stored in your 
brain-cells and mine! And our speech, our methods, our 
ideals, will shape the whole destiny of the earth. Our 
ideals ! We must keep them very pure ! " 

" Pure and unspotted," she answered simply. Then with 
an adorable and feminine anticlimax: 

"Dear, does your shoulder pain you now? I'm awfully 
heavy to be leaning on you like this!" 

" You're not hurting me a bit. On the contrary, your 
touch, your presence, are life to me ! " 

' Quite sure you're comfy, boy ? " 

" Positive." 

"And happy?" 

" To the limit." 

" I'm so glad. Because I am, too. I'm awfully sleepy, 
Allan. Do you mind if I take just a little, tiny nap?" 

For all answer he patted her, and smoothed her hair, 
her cheek, her full, warm throat. 

Presently by her slow, gentle breathing he knew she was 
asleep. 

For a long time he half -lay there against the oak, softly 
swathed in his bear-skin, on the odorous bed of fir, holding 
her in his arms, looking into the dancing firelight. 

And night wore on, calm, perfumed, gentle; and the 
thoughts of the man were long, long thoughts  thoughts 
" that do often He too deep for tears." 




CHAPTER V 

DEADLY PERIL 

Pages on pages would not tell the full details of the following week  the talks they had, the snaring and shooting of 
small game, the fishing, the cleaning out of the bungalow, 
and the beginnings of some order in the estate, the rapid 
healing of Stern's arm, and all the multifarious little events 
of their new beginnings of life there by the river-bank. 

But there are other matters of more import than such 
homely things; so now we come to the time when Stern 
felt the pressing imperative of a return to the tower. For 
he lacked tools in every way ; he needed them to build furniture, doors, shutters; to clear away the brush and make 
the place orderly, rational and beautiful; to start work on 
his projected laboratory and power-plant; for a thousand 
purposes. 

He wanted his binoculars, his shotgun and rifles, and 
much ammunition, as well as a boat-load of canned supplies and other goods. Instruments, above all, he had to 
have. 

So, though Beatrice still, with womanly conservatism, 
preferred to let well enough alone for the present, and 
stay away from the scene of such ghastly deeds as had 
taken place on the last day of the invasion by the Horde, 
Stern eventually convinced and overargued her; and on 
what he calculated to be the i6th day of June, 2912  
the tenth day since the fight  they set sail for Manhattan. 

A favoring northerly breeze, joined with a clear sky and 
sunshine of unusual brilliancy, made the excursion a gala 

192 



DEADLY PERIL 193 

time for both. As they put their supplies of fish, squirrelmeat and breadfruit aboard the banca and shoved the rude 
craft off the sand, both she and he felt like children on an 
outing. 

Allan's arm was now so well that he permitted himself 
the luxury of a morning plunge. The invigoration of this 
was still upon him as, with a song, he raised the clumsy 
skin sail upon the rough-hewn mast. Beatrice curled down 
in her tiger-skin at the stern, took one of the paddles, and 
made ready to steer. He settled himself beside her, the 
thongs of his sail in his hand. Thus happy in comradeship, 
they sailed away to southward, down the blue wonder of 
the river, flanked by headlands, wooded heights, crags, 
cliffs and Palisades, now all alike deserted. , 

Noon found them opposite the fluted columns of gray 
granite that once had borne aloft the suburbs of Englewood. 
Stern recognized the conformation of the place ; but though 
he looked hard, could find no trace of the Interstate Park 
road that once had led from top to bottom of the Palisades, 
nor any remnant of the millionaires' palaces along the 
heights there. 

' Stone and brick have long since vanished as structures,' 
he commented. " Only steel and concrete have stood the 
gaff of uncounted years! Where all that fashion, wealth 
and beauty once would have scorned to notice us, girl, now 
what's left? Hear the cry of that gull? The barking of 
that fox? See that green flicker over the pinnacle? Some 
new, bright bird, never dreamed of in this country! And 
even with the naked eye I can make out the palms and the 
lianas tangled over the verge of what must once have been 
magnificent gardens ! " 

He pointed at the heights. 

" Once," said he, " I was consulted by a sausage-king 
named Breitkopf, who wanted to sink an elevator-shaft 
from the top to the bottom of this very cliff, so he could 
reach his hundrcd-thousand-doUar launch in ease. Breitkopf didn't like my price; he insulted me in several rather 




u 



194 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

unpleasant ways. The cliff is still herei I see. So am I. 
But Breitkopf is elsewhere." 

He laughed, and swept the river with a glance. 
Steer over to the eastward, will you?" he asked. 

We'll go in through Spu3rten Duyvil and the Harlem. 
That'll bring us much nearer the tower than by landing on 
the west shore of Manhattan." 

Two hours later they had run past the broken arches of 
Fordham, Washington, and High Bridges, and following 
the river  on both banks of which a few scattered ruins 
showed through the massed foliage  were drawing toward 
Randall's and Ward's islands and Hell Gate. 

Wind and tide still favored them. In safety they passed 
the ugly shoals and ledges. Here Stern took the paddle, 
while Beatrice went to the bow and left all to his directing 
hand. 

By three o'clock in the afternoon they were drawing past 
Blackwell's Island. The Queensboro Bridge still stood, as 
did the railway bridges behind them; but much wreckage 
had fallen into the river, and in one place formed an ugly 
whirlpool, which Stern had to avoid by some hard work 
with the paddle. 

The whole structure was sagging badly to southward, 
as though the foundations had given way. Long, rusted 
masses of steel hung from the spans, which drooped as 
though to break at any moment. Though all the flooring 
had vanished centuries before. Stem judged an active man 
could still make his way across the bridge. 

" That's their engineering," gibed he, as the little boat 
sailed under and they looked up like dwarfs at the legs of 
a Colossus. " The old Roman bridges are good for practically eternity, but these jerry steel things, run up for 
profits, go to pieces in a mere thousand years! Well, the 
steel magnates are gone now, and their profits with them. 
But this junk remains as a lesson and a warning, Beta; the 
race to come must build better than this, and sounder, every 
way ! " 




DEADLY PERIL 195 

On, on they sailed, marveling at the terrific destmction 
on either hand  the dense forests now grown over Brooklyn and New York alike. 

"We'll be there before long now,' said Allan. "And 
if we have any luck at all, and nothing happens, we ott 
to be started for home by nightfall. You d<mt mind a 
moonlight sail up the Hudson, do you?" 

It was past four by the time the banca nosed her way 
slowly in among the rotten docks and ruined hulks of 
steaniships, and with a gentle rustling came to rest among 
the reeds and rushes now growmg rarJc at the foot of what 
had once been Twenty-Third Street. 

A huge sea-tortoise, disturbed, slid off the sand-bank 
where he had been sunning himself and paddled sulkily 
away. A blue heron flapped up from the thicket, and with 
a frog in its bill awkwardly took flight, its long neck 
crooked, legs dangling absurdly. 

Some mighty big changes, all right," commented Stem. 

Yes, there's got to be a deal of work done here before 
things are right again. But there's time enough, time 
enough  there's all the time we need, we and the people 
who shall come after us ! " 

They made the banca fast, noting that the tide was high 
and that the leather cord was securely tied to a gnarled 
willow that grew ar the water's edge. Half an hour later 
they had made their way across town to Madison Avenue. 

It was with strange feelings they once more approached 
the scene of their battle against such frightful odds with 
the Horde. Stem was especially curious to note the effect 
of his Pulverite, not only on the building itself but on the 
square. 

This effect exceeded his expectations. Less than two 
hundred feet of the tower now stood and the whole westem fade was but a mass of cracked and gaping ruin. 

Out on the Square the huge elms and pines had beea 
uprooted and flung in titanic confusion, like a game of 
giants' jack-straws. And vast conical excavations showed. 



 
it 




196 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

here and there, where vials of the explosive had struck 
the earth. Gravel and rocks had even been thrown over 
the Metropolitan Building itself into the woodland glades 
of Madison Avenue. And, worse, bits of bone  a leg-bone, 
a shoulder-blade, a broken skull with flesh still adhering  
here or there met the eye. 

" Mighty good thing the vultures have been busy here," 
commented Stern. "If they hadn't, the place wouldn't be 
even approachable. Gad ! I thank my stars what we've got 
to do won't take more than an hour. If we had to stay 
here after dark I'd surely have the creeps, in spite of all 
my scientific materialism ! Well, no use being retrospective. 
We're living in the present and future now; not the past. 
Got the plaited cords Beatrice? We'll need them before 
long to make up our bundle with." 

Thus talking, Stern kept the girl from seeing too much 
or brooding over what she saw. He engaged her actively 
on the work in hand. Until he had assured himself there 
was no danger from falling fragments in the shattered halls 
and stairways that led up to the gaping ruin at the truncated 
top of the tower he would not let her enter the building, 
but set her to fashioning a kind of puckered bag with a 
huge skin taken from the furrier's shop in the Arcade, 
while he explored. 

He returned after a while, and together they climbed 
over the debris and ruins to the upper rooms which had 
been their home during the first few days after the awakening. 

The silence of death that lay over the place was appalling  that and the relics of the frightful battle. But they 
had their work to do; they had to face the facts. 

" We're not children, Beta," said the man. " Here we 
are for a purpose. The quicker we get our work done the 
better. Come on, let's get busy ! " 

Stifling the homesick feeling that tried to win upon them 
they set to work. All the valuables they could recover they 
collected  canned supplies, tools, instruments, weapons, 




DEADLY PERIL 197 

ammunition and a hundred and one miscellaneous articles 
they had formerly used. 

This flotsam of a former civilization they carried down 
and piled in the skin bag at the broken doorway. And 
darkness began to fall ere the task was done. 

Still trickled the waters of the fountain in Madison Forest through the dim evening aisles of the shattered forest. 
A solemn hush fell over the dead world ; night was at hand. 

" Come, let's be going," spoke the man, his voice lowered 
in spite of himself, the awe of the Infinite Unknown upon 
him. " We can eat in the banca on the way. With the 
tide behind us, as it will be, we ought to get home by morning. And I'll be mighty glad never to see this place again ! ' 

He slung a sack of cartridges over his shoulder and 
picked up one of the cord loops of the bag wherein lay their 
treasure-trove. Beatrice took the other. 

" Tm ready," said she. Thus they started. 

All at once she stopped short. 

" Hark ! What's that ? " she exclaimed under her breath. 

Far off to northward, plaintive, long-drawn and inex 
pressibly mournful, a wailing cry reechoed in the wilderness  fell, rose, died away, and left the stillness even more 
ghastly than before. 

Stern stood rooted. In spite of all his aplomb and matter-of-fact practicality, he felt a strange thrill curdle through 
his blood, while on the back of his neck the hair drew taut 
and stiff. 

" What is it ? " asked Beatrice again. 

" That ? Oh, some bird or other, I guess. It's nothii. 
Come on ! " 

Again he started forward, trying to make light of the 
cry ; but in his heart he knew it well. 

A thousand years before, far in the wilds near Ungava 
Bay, in Labrador, he had heard the same plaintive, starving call  and he remembered still the deadly peril, the long 
fight, the horror that had followed. 

He knew the cry ; and his soul quivered with the fear of 




198 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

it ; fear not for himself, but for the life of this girl whose 
keeping lay within the hollow of his hand. 

For the long wail that had trembled across the vague 
spaces of the forest, affronting the majesty and dignity of 
night and the coming stars with its blood-lusting plaint of 
famine, had been none other than the summons to the hunt, 
the news of quarry, the signal of a gathering wolf-pack on 
their trail. 



 

f 



CHAPTER VI 

TRAPPED ! 

" That's not the truth you Ve telling me, Allan," said Beatrice 
very gravely. " And if we don't tell each other the whole 
truth always, how can we love each other perfectly and do 
the work we have to do? I don't want you to spare me 
anything, even the most terrible things. That's not the 
cry of a bird  it's wolves ! " 

" Yes, that's what it is," the man admitted. " I was in 
the wrong. But, you see  it startled me at first. Don't 
be alarmed, little girl! We're well armed you see, and  

" Are we going to stay here in the tower if they attack? 

" No. They might hold us prisoners for a week. There's 
no telling how many there may be. Hundreds, perhaps 
thousands. Once they get the scent of game, they'll gather 
for miles and miles around; from all over the island. So 
you see  " 

" Our best plan, then, will be to make for the banca? " 

" Assuredly ! It's only a matter of comparatively few 
minutes to reach it, and once we're aboard, we're safe. 
We can laugh at them and be on our homeward way at the 
same time. The quicker we start the better. Come on ! " 

" Come ! " she repeated. And they made their second 
start after Stern had assured himself his automatic hung 
easily in reach and that the guns were loaded. 

Together they took their way along the shadowy depths 
of the forest where once Twenty-Third Street had lain. 
Bravely and strongly the girl bore her half of the load as 
they broke through the undergrowth, clambered over fallen 
and rotten logs, or sank ankle-deep in mossy swales. 

199 




aoo DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Even though they felt the danger, perhaps at that very 
moment slinking, sneaking, crawling nearer off there in 
the vague, darkling depths of the forest, they still sensed 
the splendid comradeship of the adventure. No longer as 
a toy, a chattel, an instnunent of pleasure or amusement 
did the idea of woman now exist in the world. It had 
altered, grown higher, nobler, purer  it had become that 
of mate and equal, comrade, friend, the indissoluble other 
half of man. 

Beatrice spoke. 

" You mustn't take more of the weight than I do, Allan," 
she insisted, as they struggled onward with their burden. 
" Your wounded arm isn't strong enough yet to  " 

" S-h-h-h ! " he cautioned. " We've got to keep as quiet 
as possible. Come on  the quicker we get these things 
aboard and push off the better! Everything depends on 
speed 1 " 

But speed was hard to make. The way seemed terribly 
long, now that evening had closed in and they could no 
longer be exactly sure of their path. The ctunbersome 
burden impeded them at every step. In the gloom they 
stumbled, tripped over vines and creepers, and became 
involved among the close-crowding boles. 

Suddenly; once again the wolf-cry burst out, this time 
reechoed from another and another savage throat, wailing 
and plaintive and full of frightful portent. 

So much nearer now it seemed that Beatrice and Allan 
both stopped short. Panting with their labors, they stood 
still, fear-smitten. 

" They can't be much farther off now than Thirty-Fifth 
Street," the man exclaimed under his breath. " And we're 
hardly past Second Avenue yet  and look at the infernal 
thickets and brush we've got to beat through to reach the 
river! Here, I'd better get my revolver ready and hold it 
in my free hand. Will you change over? I can take the 
bag in my left. I've got to have the right to shoot with ! " 

"Why not drop everything and run for the banca?" 



TRAPPED! Ml 

"And desert the job? Leave all we came for? And 
maybe not be able to get any of the things for Heaven 
knows how long? I guess not!" 

" But, Allan" 

"No, no! What? Abandon all our plans because of a 
few wolves? Let 'em come! We'll show 'em a thing or 
two ! " 

" Give me the revolver, then  you can have the rifle ! " 

" That's right here ! " 

Each now with a firearm in the free hand, they started 
forward again. On and on they lunged, they wallowed 
through the forest, half carrying, half dragging the sack 
which now seemed to have grown ten times heavier and 
which at every moment caught on bushes, on limbs and 
among the dense undergrowth. 

" Oh, look  look there ! " cried Beatrice. She stopped 
short again, pointing the revolver, her finger on the trigger. 

Allan saw a lean, gray form, furtive and sneaking, slide 
across a dim open space off toward the left, a space where 
once First Avenue had cut through the city from south to 
north. 

" There's another ! " he whispered, a strange, choked 
feeling all around his heart. " And look  three more ! 
They're working in ahead of us. Here, 111 have a shot at 
'em, for luck ! " 

A howl followed the second spurt of flame in the dusk. 
One of the gray, gaunt portents of death licked, yapping, 
at his flank. 

" Got you, all right ! " gibed Stern. " The kind o' game 
you're after isn't as easy as you think, you devils ! " 

But now from the other side, and from behind them, the 
slinking creatures gathered. Their eyes glowed, gleamed, 
burned softly yellow through the dusk of the great wilderness that once had been the city's heart. The two last 
humans in the world could even catch the flick of ivory 
fangs, the lolling wet redness of tongues could hear the 
soughing breath through those infernal jaws. 




202 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Stern raised the rifle again, then lowered it. 

" No use," said he quite calmly. " God knows how many 
there are. I might use up all our ammunition and still 
leave enough of 'em to pick our bones. They'll be all 
around us in a minute; they'll be worrying at us, dragging 
us down ! Come on  come on, the boat ! " 

" Light a torch, Allan. They're afraid of fire." 

" Grand idea, little girl ! " 

Even as he answered he was scrabbling up dry-kye. 
Came the rasp of his flint. 

" Give 'em a few with the automatic, while I get this 
going ! " he commanded. 

The gun spat twice, thrice. Then rose a snapping, snarling wrangle. Off there in the gloom a hideous turmoil 
grew. 

It ended in screams of pain and rage, suddenly throttled, 
choked, and torn to nothing. A worrying, rending, gnashing told the story of the wounded wolf's last mcmient. 

Stern sprang up, a dry flaming branch of resinous fir in 
his hand. The rifle he thrust back into the bag. 

" Ate him, still warm, eh ? " he cried. " Fine ! And five 
shots left in the gun. You won't miss, Beta! You can't ! " 

Forward they struggled once more. 

" Gad, we'll hang to this bag now, whatever happens 1 " 
panted Stern, jerking it savagely off a jagged stub. " Five 
minutes more and we'll  arrh ! would you ? " 

The flaring torch he dashed full at a grisly mtuzle that 
snapped and slavered at his legs. To their nostrils the singe 
of burned hair wafted. Yelping, the beast swerved back. 

But others ran in and in at them ; and now the torch was 
failing. Both of them shouted and struck; and the revolver stabbed the night with fire. 

Pandemonium rose in the forest. Cries, howls, long 
wails and snuffling barks blent with the clicking of ivories, 
the pad-pad-pad of feet, the crackling of the underbrush. 

All around, wolves. On either side, behind, in front, the 




TRAPPED! 203 

sliding, bristling, sneaking, suddenly bold horrors of the 
wild 

And the ring was tightening; the attack was coming, now, 
more and more concertedly. The swinging torch could not 
now drive them back so fast, so far. 

Strange gleams shot against the tree-trunks, wavered 
through the dusk, lighted the harsh, rage-contracted face 
of the man, fell on the laboring, skin-clad figure of the 
woman as they still fought on and on with their precious 
burden, hoping for a glimpse of water, for the river, and 
salvation. 

"Take a tree?" gasped Beatrice. 

" And maybe stay there a week ? And use up all our 
ammunition? Not yet  no  nol The boatl" 

On, ever on, they struggled. 

A strange, unnatural exhilaration filled the girl, banishing 
thoughts of peril, sending the blood aglow through every 
vein and fiber of her wonderful young body. 

Stern realized the peril more keenly. At any moment 
now he understood that one of the devils in gray might 
hurl itself at the full throat of Beatrice or at his own. 

And once the taste of blcxxl lay on those crimson tongues 
 good-by ! 

" The boat  the boat ! " he shouted, striking right and 
left like mad with the smoky, half -extinguished flare. 

" There  the river ! " suddenly cried Beatrice. 

Through the columns of the forest she had seen at last 
the welcome gleam of water, starlit, beautiful and calm. 
Stern saw it, too. A demon now, he charged the snarling 
ring. Back he drove them ; he turned, seized the bag, and 
again plunged desperately ahead. 

Together he and Beatrice crashed out among the willows and the alders on the sedgy shore, with the vague, 
shifting, bristling horror of the wolf-pack at their heels. 

 Here, beat 'em off while I cut the cord  while I get 
the bag in  and shove off! " panted Stem. 




ao4 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

She seized the torch from his hand. Up he snatched 
the rifle again, and with a pointblank volley flung three of 
the grays writhing and yelling all in the mud and weeds 
and trampled cattails on the river verge. 

Down he threw the gun. He turned and swept the dark 
shore, there between the ruins of the wharves, with a keen 
reconnoitering glance. 

What? What was this? 

There stood the aged willow to which the banca had been 
tied. But the boat  where was it? 

With a cry Stem leaped to the tree. His clutching hands 
fumbled at the trunk. 

"My Godl Here's  herc's the cord!" he stammered. 
"But it's been cut! The boat the boafs Qone!" 




CHAPTER VII 

A NIGHT OF TOIL 

An hour later, from the gnarled branches of the willow


up into which Stern had fairly flung her, and where he had 
himself clambered with the beasts ravening at his legs  
the two sole survivors of the human race watched the glowering eyes that dotted the velvet gloom. 

" I estimate a couple of hundred, all told," judged Allan. 
" Odd we never ran across any of them before to-night. 
Must be some kind of a migration under way  maybe some 
big shift of game, of deer, or buffalo, or what-not. But 
then, in that case, they wouldn't be so starved, so dead-set 
on white meat as they seem to be." 

Beta shifted her place on a horizontal limb. 

" It's awfully hard for a soft wood," she remarked. " Do 
you think we'll have to stay here long, dear? " 

' That depends. I don't see that the fifteen we've killed 
since roosting here have served as any terrible examples 
to the others. And we're about twenty cartridges to the 
bad. They're not worth it, these devils. We've got to 
save our ammunition for something edible till I can get my 
shop to running and begin making my own powder. No; 
must be there's some other and better way." 

' But what ? " asked the girl. " We're safe enough here, 
but we're not getting any nearer home  and I'm so hungry ! " 

" Same here," Stern coincided. " And the lunch was all 
in the boat; worse luck! Who the deuce could have cut 
her loose? I thought we'd pretty effectually cleared out 
those Hinkmatinks, or whatever the Horde consisted of. 

205 



I 




206 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

But evidently something, or somebody, is still left alive with 
a terrific gnidge against us, or an awful longing for navigation/' 

" Was the cord broken or cut? " 

" ril see." 

Stern clambered to a lower branch. With the triggerguard of his rifle he was able to catch the cord. All about 
the trunk, meanwhile, the wolves leaped snarling. The 
fetid animal smell of them was strong upon the air  that, 
and the scent of blood and raw meat, where they had 
feasted on the slain. 

With the severed cord, Allan climbed back to where Beatrice sat.  

" Hold the rifle, will you ? " asked he. A moment, and 
by the quick showers of sparks that issued from his flint and 
steel, he was examining the leather thong. 

''Cut!" 

"Cut? But then, then" 

"No tide or wind to blame. Some intelligence, even 
though rudimentary, has been at work here  is at work  
opposed to us." 

"But what?" 

" No telling. There may be more things in this world yet 
than either of us dream. Perhaps we committed a very grave 
error to leave the apparently peaceful little nook we've got, 
up there on the Hudson, and tackle this place again. But 
who could ever have thought of anything like this after 
that terrible slaughter ? " 

They kept silence a few minutes. The wolves now had 
sunk to a plane of comparative insignificance. At the very 
worst Stern could annihilate them, one by one, with a lavish 
expenditure of his ammunition. Unnoticed now, they 
yelped, and scratched and howled about the tree, sat on 
their haunches, waiting in the gloom, or sneaked  vague 
shadows  among the deeper dusks of the forest. 

And once again the east began to glow, even as when 
he and she had watched the moon rise over the hills beyond 




A NIGHT OF TOIL 207 

the Hudson; and their hearts beat with joy for even that 
relief from the dark mystery of solitude and night. 

After a while the man spoke. 

" It's this way," said he. " Whoever cut that cord and 
either let the banca float away or else stole it, evidontly 
doesn't want to come to close quarters for the present, so 
long as these wolves are making themselves friendly. 

" Perhaps, in a way, the wolves are a factor in our favor ; 
perhaps, without them, we might have had a poisoned arrow 
sticking into us, or a spear or two, before now. My guess 
is that we'll get a wide berth so long as the wolves stay in 
the neighborhood. I think the anthropoids, or whoever 
they were, must have been calculating on ambushing us as 
we came back, and expected to 'get' us while we were 
hunting for the boat. 

" They didn't reckon on this little diversion. When they 
heard it they probably departed for other regions. They 
won't be coming around just yet, that's a safe wager. 
Mighty lucky, eh? Think what Ai targets we'd make, up 
here in this willow, by moonlight ! " 

" You're right, Allan. But when it comes daylight we'll 
make better ones. And I don't know that I enjoy sitting 
up here and starving to death, with a body-guard of wolves 
to keep away the Horde, very much more than I would 
taking a chance with the arrows. It's two sixes, either 
way, and not a bit nice, is it ? " 

" Hang the whole business ! There must be some other 
way  some way out of this infernal pickle! Hold on  
wait  I  I almost see it now ! " 

" What's your plan, dear? " 

" Wait ! Let me think a minute I " 

She kept silence. Together they sat among the spreading branches in the growing moonlight. A bat reeled overhead, chippering weakly. Far away a whippoorwiU b;an 
its fluty, insistent strain. A distant cry of some htmting 
beast echoed, unspeakably weird, among the dead, deserted 
streets buried in oblivion. The brush crackled and snapped 




2o8 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

with the movements of the wolf-pack ; the continued snarling, whining, yapping, stilled the chorus of the frogs along 
the sedgy banks. 

" If I could only snare a good, lively onet" suddenly 
brcdce out Stem. 

"What for?" 

"Why, don't you see?" And with sudden inspiration 
he expounded. Together, eager as children, they planned. 
Beatrice clapped her hands with sheer delight. 

" But," she added pensively, " it'll be a little hard on the 
wolf, won't it?" 

Stem had to laugh. 

" Yes," he assented ; " but think how much he'll leara 
about the new kind of game he tried to hunt ! " 

Half an hour later a grim old warrior of the pack, deftly 
and securely caught by one hind leg with the slip-noosed 
leather cord, dangled inverted from a limb, high out of 
reach of the others. 

Slowly he swung, jerking, writhing, frothing as he fought 
in vain to snap his jaws upon the cord he could not touch. 
And night grew horrible with the stridor of his yells. 

" Now then," remarked Stern calmly, " to work. The 
moonlight's good enough to shoot by. No reason I should 
miss a single target." 

Followed a time of frightful tumult as the living ate the 
dying and the dead, worrying the flesh from bones that had 
as yet scarcely ceased to move. Beatrice, pale and silent, 
yet very calm, watched the slaughter. Stern, as quietly 
methodical as though working out a reaction, sighted, fired, 
sighted, fired. And the work went on apace. The bag of 
cartridges grew steadily lighter. The work was done long 
before all the wolves had died. For the survivors, gorged 
to repletion, some wounded, others whole, slunk gradually 
away and disappeared in the dim glades, there to sleep off 
their camubal debauch. 

At last Stem judged the time was come to descend. 

" Bark away, old boy ! " he exclaimed. " The louder 



REBIRTH OF CIVILIZATION 213 

there, not a book remains on the surface of this entire 
earth. The finest hand-made linen paper has disintqated 
ages ago. And parchment has probably crinkled and 
molded past all recognition. Besides, up-to-date scientific 
books, such as we need, weren't done on parchment. We're 
playing into gorgeous luck with these cyclopedias, for everything I need and can't remember is in them. But it certainly was one job to sort those scattered sheets out of the 
rubbish-pile in the library and rearrange them." 

" Yes, that was hard work, but it's done now. Come 
on out into the garden, Allan, and see if our crops have 
grown any during the night ! " 

The grounds about the bungalow were a delight to them. 
Like two children they worked, day by day, to enlarge and 
beautify their holdings, their lands won back from nature's 
greed. 

Though wild fruits  some new, others familiar  and fish 
and the plentiful game all about them offered abundant 
food, to be had for the mere seeking, they both agreed on 
the necessity of reestablishing agriculture. For they disliked the thought of being driven southward, with the return of each successive winter. They wanted, if advisable, 
to be able to winter in the bungalow. And this meant some 
provision for the unproductive season. 

" It won't always be summer here, you know," Stem 
told her. " This Eden will sometime lie wet and dreary 
under the winter rains that I expect now take the place of 
snow. And the eternal curse of Adam  toil  is not yet 
lifted even from us two survivors of the fifteen hundred 
million that once ruled the earth. We, and those who shall 
come after, must have the old-time foods again. And that 
means work ! " 

They had cleared a patch of black, virgin soil, in a sunny 
hollow. Here Stern had transplanted all the wild descendants of the vegetables and grains of other time which in his 
.itill limited explorations he had come across. 

The work of clearing away the thorns and bushes, the 




2IO DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Robinson Crusoe's raft had been a mere nothing to build 
compared with this one that the engineer had to construct 
there at the water's edge, among the sedges and the reeds. 
For Crusoe had planks and beams and nails to help him, 
while Stem had naught but his ax, the forest, and some 
rough cordage. 

He had to labor in the gloom, as well, listening betimes 
for sounds of peril or stopping to stimulate the wolf. The 
dull and rusty ax retarded him; blisters rose upon his 
palms, and broke, and formed again. But still he toiled. 

The three longitudinal spruce timbers he lashed together 
with poles and with the cords that Beatrice prepared for 
him. On these, again, he laid and lashed still other poles, 
rough-hewn. 

In half an hour's hard work, while the moon began to 
sink to the westward, he had stepped a crude mast and 
hewed a couple of punt-poles. 

" No use our trying to row this monstrosity," he said to 
Beatrice, stopping a moment to dash the sweat oflF his forehead with a shaking hand. " We either rig the skin sack 
in some way as a sail, or we drift up with the tide, tie at 
the ebb, and so on  and if we make the bungalow in three 
days we're lucky! 

" Come on now, Beatrice. Lend a hand here and we'll 
launch her! Good thing the tide's coming up  she almost 
floats already. Now, one, two, three I " 

The absurd raft yielded, moved, slid out upon the marshy 
water and was afloat! 

 Get aboard ! " commanded Allan. " Go forward to 
the salon de luxe. I'll stow the bag aft, so." 

He lifted her in his arms and set her on the raft. The 
bag he carefully deposited at what passed for the stem. 
The raft sank a bit and wallowed, but bore up. 

" Now then, all aboard ! " cried Stem. 

"The wolf, Allan, the wolf! How about himf" 

"That's right, I almost pltunb forgot! I guess he's 
earned his life, all right enough." 



A NIGHT OF TOIL 211 

Quickly he slashed the cord. The wolf dropped limp, 
tried to crawl, but could not, and lay panting on its side, 
tongue lolling, eyes glazed and dim. 

" He'll be a horrible example all his life of what it means 
to monkey with the new kind of meat," remarked Allan, 
clambering aboard. "If wolves or anthropoids can learn, 
they ought to learn from him ! " 

Strongly, steadily, they poled the raft out through the 
marshy slip, on, on, past the crumbling wreckage of the 
pier-head. 

" Now the tide's got us," exclaimed Allan with satisfaction, as the moonlit current, all silver and rippling with 
calm beauty, swung them up-stream. 

Beatrice, still strong, and full of vigorous, pulsing life, 
in spite of the long vigil in the tree and the hard night of 
work, curled up at the foot of the rough mast, on the mass 
of fir-tips Stem had piled there. 

" You steer, boy," said she, " and I'll go to work on making some kind of sail out of the big skin. By morning we 
ought to have our little craft under full control. 

" It's one beautiful boat, isn't it ? " mocked Stem, poling 
off frcMn a gaunt hulk that barred the way. 

" It mayn't be verj' beautiful," she answered softly, " but 
it carries the greatest, purest, noblest love that ever was 
since the world began  it carries the hope of the whole 
world, of all the ages  and it's taking us home ! " 




CHAPTER VIII 

. THE REBIRTH OF CINaUZATION 

A MONTH had hardly gone, before order and peace and the 
promise of bountiful harvests dwelt in and all about Hope 
Lodge, as they had named the bungalow. 

From the kitchen, where the stove and the aluminum 
utensils now shone bright and free from rust, to the bedrooms where fir-tips and soft skin rugs made wondrous 
sleeping places, the house was clean and sweet and beautiful 
again. Rough-hewn chairs and tables, strong, serviceable 
and eloquent of nature  through which this rebirth of the 
race all had to come  adorned the rooms. Fur rugs covered the floors. 

In lieu of pictures, masses of flowers and great sprays of 
foliage stood in clay pots of Stern's own manufacture and 
firing. And on a rustic book-case in their living room, 
where the big fireplace was, and where the southern sun 
beat warmest in, stood their chief treasure  a set of encyclopedias. 

Stern had made leather bindings for these, with the deft 
help of Beatrice. The original bindings had vanished before the attacks of time and insects centuries before. But 
the leaves were still intact. For these were thin sheets of 
nickel, printed by the electrolysis process. 

" Just a sheer streak of luck," Stern remarked, as he 
stood looking at this huge piece of fortune with the girl. 
" Just a kindly freak of fate, that Van Amburg should have 
bought one of Edison's first sets of nickel-sheet books. 

" Except for the few sets of these in existence, here and 

212 




REBIRTH OF CIVILIZATION 213 

there, not a book remains on the surface of this exitire 
earth. The finest hand-made linen paper has disintegrated 
ages ago. And parchment has probably crinkled and 
molded past all recognition. Besides, up-to-date scientific 
books, such as we need, weren't done on parchment. We're 
playing into gorgeous luck with these cyclopedias, for everything I need and can't remember is in them. But it certainly was one job to sort those scattered sheets out of the 
rubbish-pile in the library and rearrange them." 

" Yes, that was hard work, but it's done now. Come 
on out into the garden, Allan, and see if our crops have 
grown any during the night ! " 

The grounds about the bungalow were a delight to them. 
Like two children they worked, day by day, to enlarge and 
beautify their holdings, their lands won back from nature's 
greed. 

Though wild fruits  some new, others familiar  and fish 
and the plentiful game all about them offered abundant 
food, to be had for the mere seeking, they both agreed on 
the necessity of reestablishing agriculture. For they disliked the thought of being driven southward, with the return of each successive winter. They wanted, if advisable, 
to be able to winter in the bungalow. And this meant some 
provision for the unproductive season. 

" It won't always be summer here, you know," Stem 
told her. " This Eden will sometime lie wet and dreary 
under the winter rains that I expect now take the place of 
snow. And the eternal curse of Adam  toil  is not yet 
lifted even from us two survivors of the fifteen hundred 
million that once ruled the earth. We, and those who shall 
come after, must have the old-time foods again. And that 
means work ! " 

They had cleared a patch of black, virgin soil, in a sunny 
hollow. Here Stern had transplanted all the wild descendants of the vegetables and grains of other time which in his 
still limited explorations he had come across. 

The work of clearing away the thorns and bushes, the 




214 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

tangled lianas and tall trees, was severe ; but it strengthenied 
him and hardened his whip-cord muscles till they ridged his 
skin like iron. He burned and pulled the stumps, spaded 
and harrowed and hoed all by hand, and made ready the 
earth for the reception of its first crop in a thousand years. 

He recalled enough of his anthropology and botany from 
university days to recognize the reverted, twisted and stringy 
little degenerate wild-potato root which had once served the 
Aztecs and Pueblo Indians for food, and could again, with 
proper cultivation, be brought back to full perfection. Likewise with the maize, the squash, the wild turnip, and many 
other vegetable forms. 

" Three years of cultivation," he declared, " and I can 
win them back to edibility. Five, and they'll be almost 
where they were before the great catastrophe. As for the 
fruits, the apple, cherry, and pear, all they need is care and 
scientific grafting. 

" I predict that ten years from today, orchards and cornfields and gardens shall surround this bungalow, and the 
heritage of man shall be brought back to this old world ! " 

" Always giving due credit to the encyclopedia,' added 
Beatrice. 

" And to you!" he laughed happily. " This is all on your 
account, anyhow. If I were alone in the world, you bet 
there'd be no gardens made ! " 

" No, I don't believe there would," she agreed, a serious 
look on her face. " But, then," she concluded, smiling 
again, " you aren't alone, Allan. You've got me! " 

He tried to catch her in his arms, but she evaded him and 
ran back toward the bungalow. 

" No, no, you've got to work," she called to him from 
the porch. " And so have I. Good-by ! " And with a 
wave of the hand, a strong, brown hand now, slim and very 
beautiful, she vanished. 

Stem stood in thought a moment, then shook his head, 
and, with a singular expression, picked up his hoe, and once 
more fell to cultivating his precious little garden-patch, on 




REBIRTH OF CIVILIZATION 215 

virhkh so infinitdy much depended. But something lay 
upon his mind; he paused, reflecting; then picked up a 
stone and weighed it in his hand, tried another, and a third. 

" I'm damned," he remarked, " if these feel right to me I 
I've been wondering about it for a week now  there's got 
to be some answer to it. A stone of this size in the old 
days would certainly have weighed more. And that big 
boulder I rooted out from the middle of the field  in the 
other days I couldn't have more than stirred it. 

" Am I so very much stronger? So much as all that ? Or 
have things grown lighter ? Is that why I can leap farther, 
walk better, run faster ? What's it all about, anyhow ? ' 

He could not work, but sat down on a rock to ponder. 
Numerous phenomena occurred to him, as they had while 
he had lain wounded under the tree by the river during their 
first few days at the bungalow. % 

" My observations certainly show a day only twenty-two 
hours and fifty-seven minutes long; that's certain," he 
mused. " So the earth is undoubtedly smaller. But what's 
that got to do with the mass of the earth? With weight? 
Hanged if I can make it out at all I 

" Even though the earth has shrunk, it ought to have 
the same power of gravitation. If all the molecules and 
atoms really were pressed together, with no space between, 
probably the earth wouldn't be much bigger than a football, but it would weigh just that much, and a body would 
fall toward it from space just as fast as now. Quite a 
hefty football, eh? For the life of me I can't see why 
the earth's having shrunk has affected the weight of everything!" 

Perplexed, he went back to his work ag. And though 
he tried to banish the puzzle from his mind it still continued 
to haunt and to annoy him. 

Each day brought new and interesting activities. Now 
they made an expedition to gather a certain kind of reeds 
which Beatrice could plat into cordage and basketry; now 
they peeled quantities of birch-bark, which on rainy days 




2i6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

they occupied themselves in splitting into thin sheets for 
paper. Stem manufactured a very excellent ink in his 
improvised laboratory on the second floor, and the split and 
pointed quills of a wild goose served them for pens in 
taking notes and recording their experiences. 
. " Paper will come later, when we've got things a little 
more settled," he told her. " But for now this will have 
to do." 

 I guess if you can get along with skin clothmg for a 
while, I can do with birch-bark for my correspondence," 
she replied laughing. " Why not catch some of those wild 
sheep that seem so plentiful on the hills to westward? If 
we could domesticate them, that would mean wool and 
yam and cloth  and milk, too, wouldn't it? And if milk, 
why not butter ? " 

" Not so fast ! " he interposed. " Just wait a while  
we'll have cattle, goats, and sheep, and the whole business 
in due time ; but how much can one pair of human beings 
undertake? For the present we'll have to be content with 
what mutton-chops and steaks and hams I can get with a 
gun  and we're mighty lucky to have those I " 

Singularly enough, and contrary to all beliefs, they felt 
no need of salt. Evidently the natural salts in their meat 
and in the fruits they ate supplied their wants. And this 
was fortunate, because the quest of salt might have been 
difficult; they might even had had to boil sea-water to 
obtain it. 

They felt no craving for sweets, either; but when one 
day they came upon a bee-tree about three-quarters of a 
mile back in the woods to westward of the river, and when 
Stern smoked out the bees and gathered five pounds of 
honey in the closely platted rush basket lined with leaves, 
which they always carried for miscellaneous treasure-trove, 
they found the flavor delicious. They decided to add honey 
to their menu, and thereafter always kept it in a big pottery 
jar in their kitchen. 

Stem's hunting, fishing and gardening did not occupy 




REBIRTH OF CIVILIZATION 217 

his whole time. Every day he made it a rtde to woric at 
least an hour, two if possible, on the thirty-foot yawl that 
had already begun to take satisfactory shape on the timber 
ways which now stood on the river bank. 

All through July and part of August he labored on this 
boat, building it stanch and true, calking it thoroughly, 
fitting a cabin, stepping a iir mast, and making all ready for 
the great migration which he felt must inevitably be forced 
upon them by the arrival of cool weather. 

He doubted very much, in view of the setoitropic character of some of the foliage, whether even in January the 
temperature would now go below freezing; but in any event 
he foresaw that there would be no fruits available, and he 
objected to a winter on flesh foods. In preparation for the 
trip he had built a little " smoke-house " near the beach, and 
here he smoked considerable quantities of meat  deermeat, beef from a wild steer which he was so fortunate as 
to shoot during the third week of their stay at the bungalow, 
and a good score of hams from the wild pigs which rooted 
now and then among the beech growth half a mile downstream. 

Often the girl and he discussed this coming trip, of an 
evening, sitting together by the river to watch the stars and 
moon and that strange black wandering blotch that now 
and then obscured a portion of the night sky  or perchance 
leaning back in their huge, rustic easy chairs lined with 
furs on the broad piazza; or again, if the night were cool 
or rainy, in front of their blazing fire of pine knots and 
driftwood, which burned with gorgeous blues and greens 
and crimsons in the vast throat of Hope Lodge fireplace. 

Other matters, too, they talked of  strange speculations, 
impossible to solve, yet filling them with vague uneasiness, 
with wonder and a kind of mighty awe in face of the vast, 
unknowable mysteries surrounding them; the forces and 
phenomena which might, though friendly in their outward 
aspect, at any time precipitate catastrophe, ruin and death 



f 




2i8 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

upon them and extinguish in their persons all hopes of a 
world reborn. 

The haunting thought was never very far away : " Should 
either one of us be killed  what then?" 

One day Stern voiced his fear. 

" Beatrice," he said, " if anything should ever happen to 
me, and you be left alone in a world which, without me, 
would become instantly hostile and impossible, remember 
that the most scientific way out is a bullet. That's my way 
if anything happens to you! Understand?" 

She nodded, and for a long time that day the silence of 
a great pact weighed upon their souls. 



CHAPTER IX 

PLANNING THE GREAT MIGRATION 

Stern rigged a tripod for the powerful field-glasses he had 
rescued from the Metropolitan Building, and by an ingenious 
addition of a wooden tube and another lens carefully 
ground out of rock crystal, succeeded in producing (on the 
right-hand barrel of the binoculars) a telescope of reasonably high power. With this, of an evening, he often made 
long observations, after which he would spend hours figuring all over many sheets of the birch bark, which he then 
carefully saved and bound up with leather strings for future reference. 

In Van's set of encyclopedias he found a fairly large 
celestial map and thorough astronomic data. The results 
of his computations were of vital interest to him. 

He said to Beatrice one evening: 

"E>o you know, that wandering black patch in the sky 
moves in a regular orbit of its own? It's a solid body, 
dark, irregular in outline, and certainly not over five hundred miles above the surface of the earth/' 

'What can it be, dear?" 

" I don't know yet. It puzzles me tremendously. Now, 
if it would only appear in the daytime once in a while, we 
might be able to get some information or knowledge about 
it ; but, coming only at night, all it records itself as is just 
a black, moving thing. I'm working on the size of it now, 
making some careful studies. In a while I shall probably 
know its area and mass and density. But what it is I cannot say  not yet." 

219 



I 




220 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

They both pondered a while, absorbed in wonder. At 
last the engineer spoke again. 

" Beta," said he, " there's another curious fact to note. 
The axis of the earth itself has shifted more than six 
degrees, thirty minutes 1 " 

" It has ? Well  what about it ? " And she went on 
with her platting of reed cordage. 

" You don't seem much concerned about it 1 " 

" I'm not. Not in the least. It can shift all it wants to, 
for all of me. What hurt does it do? Doesn't it run just 
as well that way ? " 

Stem looked at her a moment, then laughed. 

" Oh, yes ; it runs all right," he answered. " Only I 
thought the announcement that the pole-star had thrown 
up its job might startle you a bit. But I see it doesn't. So 
far as practical results go, it accounts for the warmer climate and the decreased inclination to the plane of the 
ecliptic; or, rather, the decreased  " 

" Please, please, don't ! " she begged. " There's nothing 
really wrong, is there ? " 

" Well, that depends on how you define it. Probably 
an astronomer might think there was something very mudi 
wrong. I make it that the orbit of the earth has altered its 
relative length and width by  " 

" No figures, Allan, there's a dear. You know I'm 
awfully bad at arithmetic. Tell me what it means, won't 
you ? " 

" Well, it means, for one thing, that we've maybe spent 
a far longer time on this earth since the cataclysm than we 
even dare suspect. It may be that what we've been calculating as about a thousand years, is twice that, or even five 
times that  no telling. For another thing, I'm convinced 
by all these changes, and by the diminution of gravity and 
by the accelerated rate of revolution of the earth  " 

" Allan dear, please hand me those scissors, won't you ? " 

Stem laughed again. 

" Here ! " said he. " I guess I'm not much good as a 




PLANNING GREAT MIGRATION221 

lecturer. But I tell you one thing I'm going to do and 
that's a one best bet. I'm going to have a try at some 
really big telescope before a year's out, and know the truth 
of this thing!" 

' A big telescope ! Build one, you mean ? " 
 Not necessarily. All I need is a chance to make some 
accurate observations, and I can find out all I need to 
know. Even though I have been out of college for Jet's 



it 



Fifteen hundred years, at a guess," she suggested. 
Yes, all of that. Even so, I remember a good Wt of 
astronomy. And I've got my mind set on peeking through 
a first-class tube. If the earth has broken in two, or anything like that, and our part is skyhooting away toward the 
unknown regions of outer space beyond the gfreat ring of 
the Milky Way and is getting into an unchartered place in 
the universe  as it seems to be  why, we ought to have a 
good look at things. We ought to know what's what, eh? 

" Then there's the moon I want to investigate, too. No 
living man except myself has even seen the side that's now 
turned toward the earth. No telling what a goodglass 
mightn't show. 

" That's so, dear," she answered. " But where can you 
find the sort of telescope you need ? " 

" In Boston  in Cambridge, rather. The Harvard observatory has the biggest one within striking distance. What 
do you say to our making our trial trip in the boat, up the 
Sound and around Cape Cod, to Boston? We can spend 
a week there, then slant away for wherever we may decide 
to pass the winter. How does that suit you, Beta ? " 

She put away her work, and for a moment sat lo<ng 
in at the flames that went leaping up the huge boulder chimney. The room glowed with warmth and light that drove 
away the cheerlessness of a foggy, late August drizzle. 

" Do you really think we're wise to  to leave our home, 
with winter coming on?" she asked at length, pensively, 




222 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

the iirelight casting its glow across her cheek and glinting 
in hr eyes. 

" Wise? Yes. We can't stay here, that's certain. And 
what is there to fear out in the world? With our firearms and our knowledge of fire itself, our science and our 
human intelligence, we're far more than  match for all enemies, whether of the beast-world or of that race of the 
Horde. I hate, in a way, to revisit the ruins of New York, 
for more ammunition and canned stuffs. The place is too 
ghastly, too hideous, now, after the big fight. 

" Boston will be a clean ground for us, with infinite resources. And as I said before, there's the Cambridge observatory. It's only two or three miles back in the forest, 
from the coast; maybe not more than half a mile from 
some part of the Charles River. We can sail up, camp on 
Soldiers' Field, and visit it easily. Why not ? " 

He sat down on the tiger-rug before the fire, near the 
girl. She drew his head down into her lap ; then, when he 
was lying comfortably, began playing with his thick hair, as 
he loved so well to have her do. 

" If you think it's all right, Allan," said she, " we'll go. 
I want what you want." 

" That's my good girl ! " exclaimed the engineer. " W'U 
be ready to start in a few days now. The boat's next tlfi 
to finished. What with the breadfruit, smoked steer aid 
buffalo meat, hams and canned goods now on our shelves, 
we've certainly got enough supplies to stock her a two 
months' trip. 

" Even with less, we'd be safe in starting. You see, the 
world's lain untouched by mankind for so many centuries 
that all the blighting effect of man's folly and greed and 
general piracy has vanished. 

" The soil's got back to its natural state, animal life 
abounds, and so long as I still have a good supply of cartridges, we can live almost anywhere. Anthropoids ? I don't 
think there's much danger. Oh, yes, I remember the line 
of blue smoke we saw yesterday gver the hills to west



PLANNING GREAT MIGRATION 223 

ward; but what does that prove? Lightning may have 
started a fire  there's no telling. And we can't always stay 
here, Beta, just because there may be dangers out yonder! " 

He flung one arm toward the vast night, beyond the panes 
where the mist and storm were beating cheerlessly. 

" No, we can't camp down here indefinitely. Now's the 
time to start. As I say, weVe got all of sixty days' of 
downright civilized food on hand, for a good cruise in the 
Adventure. The chance of finding other people somewhere is too precious not to make any risk worth while. " 

Silence fell between them for a few minutes. Each saw 
visions in the flames. The man's thoughts dwelt, in particular, on this main factor of a possible rediscovery of 
other human beings somewhere. 

More than the girl, he realized the prime importance "Of 
this possibility. Though he and she loved each other very 
dearly, though they were all in all each to the other, yet he 
comprehended the loneliness she felt rather than analyzed 
 the infinite need of man for man, of woman for woman 
 the old social, group-instinct of the race beginning to 
reassert itself even in their Eden. 

Each of them longed, with a longing they hardly realized 
as yet, to hear some other human voice, to see another face, 
cb another hand and again feel the comradeship of man. 

During the past week or so, Stem had more than once 
caught himself listening for some other sound of htmian 
life and activity. Once he had found the girl standing on 
a wooded point among the pines, shading her eyes with 
her hand and watching down-stream with an attitude of 
hope which spoke more fluently than words. He had 
stolen quietly away, saying nothing, careful not to break her 
mood. For he had understood it ; it had been his very own. 

The mood expressed itself, at times, in long talks together of the seeming dreamage when there had been so 
many millions of men and women in the world. Beatrice 
and Stem found themselves dwelling with a peculiar plea 
sure on memories and descriptions of throngs. 




224 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

They would read the population statistics in Van's encyclopedia, and wonder greatly at them, for now these figures 
seemed the unreal chimeras of wild imaginings. 

They would talk of the crowded streets, the " L " crushes 
and the jams at the Bridge entrance; of packed cars and 
trains and overflowing theaters; of great concourses they 
had seen; of every kind and condition of affairs where 
thousands of their kind had once rubbed elbows, all strangers to each other, yet all one vast kin and family ready in 
case of need to succor one another, to use the collective 
intelligence for the benefit of each. 

Sometimes they indulged in fanciful comparisons, trying 
to make their present state seem wholly blest. 

' This is a pretty fine way to live, after all," Stern said 
one day, "even if it is a bit lonesome at times. There's 
no getting up in the morning and rushing to an office. It's 
a perpetual vacation! There are no appointments to keep, 
no angry clients kicking because I can't make water run 
up-hill or make cast-iron do the work of tool-steel. No 
saloons or free-lunches, no subways to stifle the breath out 
of us, no bills to pay and no bill collectors to dodge; no 
laws except the laws of nature, and such as we make ourselves; no bores and no bad shows; no politics, no yellow 
journals, no styles  " 

 Oh, dear, how I'd like to see a milliner's window again ! " 
cried Beatrice, rudely shattering his thin-spun tissue of 
optimism. " These skin-clothes, all the time, and no hats, 
and no chiffons and no  no nothing, at all  ! Oh, I never 
half appreciated things till they were all taken away ! " 

Stem, feeling that he had tapped the wrong vein, discreetly withdrew; and the sound of his calking-hammer 
from the beach, told that he was expending a certain irritation on the hull of the Adventure. 

One day he found a relic that seemed to stab him to the 
heart with a sudden realization of the tremendous gap be 
tween his own life and that which he had left. 

Hunting in the forest, to westward of the bungalow, he 



PLANNING GREAT MIGRATION22S 

came upon what at first glance seemed a very hog, straight, 
level Indian mound or earthwork; but in a moment his 
trained eye told him it was a railway embankment. 

With an almost childish eagerness he hunted for some 
trace of the track; and when, buried under earth-mold 
and rubbish, he found some rotten splinters of metal, they 
filled him with mingled pleasure and depression. 

" My God ! " he exclaimed, ' is it possible that here, 
right where I stand, countless thousands of human beings 
once passed at tremendous velocity, bent on business and 
on pleasure, now ages long vanished and meaningless and 
void ? That mighty engines whirled along this bank, where 
now the forest has been crowding for centuries? That 
all, all has perished  forever? 

" It shall not be ! ' he cried hotly, and flung his hands out 
in passionate denial. '' All shall be thus again ! All shall 
return  only far better! The world's death shall not, cannot be ! " 

Experiences such as these, leaving both of them increasingly irritated and depressed as time went on, convinced 
Stem of the imperative necessity for exploration. If hiunan 
beings still existed anywhere in the world, he and she must 
find them, even at the risk of losing life itself. Years of 
migration, he felt, would not be too high a price to pay for 
the reward of coming once again in contact with his own 
species. The innate gregariousness of man was torturing 
them both. 

Now that the hour of departure was drawing nigh, a 
strange exultation filled them both  the spirit of conquest 
and of victory. 

Together they planned the last details of the trip. 

" Is the sail coming along all right. Beta?" asked Stem, 
the night when they decided to visit Cambridge. " You expect to have it done in a day or two ? " 

' I can finish it to-morrow. It's all woven now. Just 
as soon as 1 finish binding one edge with leather strips, it'll 
be ready for you." 




226 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" All right ; then we can get a good, early start, on Monday morning. Now for the details of the freight." 

They worked out everything to its last minutiae. Nothing was forgotten, from ammunition to the soap which Stern 
had made out of moose-fat and wood-ashes and had pressed 
into cakes ; from fishing-tackle and canned goods to toothbrushes made of stiff vegetable fibers set in bone ; f r(Hn provisions even to a plentiful supply of birch-bark leaves for 
taking notes. 

" Monday morning we're off," Stem concluded, " and it 
will be the grandest lark two people ever had since time 
began! Built and stocked as the Adventure is, she's safe 
enough for anything from here to Europe. 

" Name the place you want to see, and it's yours. Florida? Bermuda? Mediterranean? With the compass I've 
made and adjusted to the new magnetic variations, and 
with the maps out of Van's set of books, I reckon we're 
good for anything, including a trip around the world. 

"The survivors will be surprised to see a fully stocked 
yawl putting in to rescue them from savagery, eh ? Imagine doing the Captain Cook stunt, with white people for 
subjects! " 

" Yes, but I'm not counting on their treating us the way 
Captain Cook was; are you? And what if we shouldn't 
find anybody, dear? What then?" 

" How can we help finding people? Could a billion and 
a half human beings die, all at once, without leaving a single 
isolated group somewhere or other ? " 

" But you never succeeded in reaching them with the 
wireless from the Metropolitan, Allan." 

" Never mind  they weren't in a condition to pick up my 
messages; that's all. We surely must find somebody in 
all the big cities we can reach by water, either along the 
coast or by running up the Mississippi or along the St. 
Lawrence and through the lakes. There's Boston, of 
course, and Philadelphia, New Orleans, San Francisco, 
St. Louis, Chicago dozens of others  no end of places I " 




PLANNING GREAT MIGRATION227 

"Oh, if they're only not all like New York!" 

' That remains to be seen. There's all of Europe, too, 
and Africa and Asia  why, the whole wide world is ours! 
We're so rich, girl, that it staggers the imagination  we're 
the richest people that have ever lived, you and I. The 
' plutes ' in the old days owned their millions ; but we own 
 we own the whole earth!" 

" Not if there's anybody else alive, dear." 

" That's so. Well, I'll be glad to share it with 'em, for 
the sake of a handshake and a ' howdy,' and a chance to 
start things going again. Do you know, I rather count on 
finding a few scattered remnants of folk in London, or 
Paris, or Berlin? 

" Just the same as in our day, a handful of ragged shepherds descended from the Mesopotamian peoples -extinct 
save for them  were tending their sheep at Kunyunjik, 
on those Babylonian ruins where once a mighty metropolis 
stood, and where five million people lived and moved, 
trafficked, loved, hated, fought, conquered, died  so now 
to-day, perhaps, we may run across a handful of white 
savages crouching in caves or rude huts among the debris of 
the Place de I'Opera, or Unter den Linden, or  " 

"And civilize them, Allan? And bring them back and 
start a colony and make the world again? Oh, AUaH, do 
you think we could ? " she exclaimed, her eyes spai:kling 
with excitement. 

" My plans include nothing less," he answered. " It's 
mighty well worth trying for, at any rate. Monday mom' ing we start, then, little girl." 

" Sunday, if you say so." 

" Impatient, now ? " he laughed. " No, Monday will 
be time enough. Lots of things yet to put in shape before 
we leave. And we'll have to trust our precious crops to 
luck, at that. Here's hoping the winter will bring nothing 
worse than rain. There's no help for it, whatever happens. 
The larger venture calls us." 

They sat there discussing many many other factors of the 




228 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

case, for a long time. The fire burned low, fell together 
and dwindled to glowing embers on the hearth. 

In the red gloom Allan felt her vague, warm, beautiful 
presence. Strong was she; vigorous, rosy as an Amazon, 
with the spirit and the beauty of the great outdoors; the 
life lived as a part of nature's own self. He realized that 
never had a woman lived like her. 

Dimly he saw her face, so sweet, so gentle in its wistful 
strength, shadowed with the hope and dreams of a whole 
race  the type, the symbol, of the eternal motherhood. 

And from his hair he drew her hand down to his mouth 
and kissed it ; and with a thrill of sudden tenderness blent 
with passion he knew all that she meant to him  this perfect woman, his love, who sometime soon was now to be 
his bride. 




CHAPTER X 

TOWARD THE GREAT CATARACT 

Pleasant and warm shone the sun that Monday morning, 
the 2d of September, warm through the greenery of oak 
and pine and fern-tree. Golden it lay upon the brakes and 
mosses by the river-bank ; silver upon the sands. 

Save for the chippering of the busy squirrels, a hush 
brooded over nature. The birds were silent. A far blue haze 
veiled the distant reaches of the stream. Over the world 
a vage, premonitory something had fallen ; it was simimer 
still, but the first touch of dissolution, of decay, had laid 
the shadow of a pall upon it. 

And the two lovers felt their hearts gladden at thought 
of the long migration out into the unknown, the migration 
that might lead them to southern shores and to perpetual 
plenty, perhaps to the great boon of contact once again 
with htunankind. 

From room to room they went, making all tight and 
fast for the long absence, taking farewell of all the treasures that during their long weeks of occupancy had accumulated there about them. 

Though Stem was no sentimentalist, yet he, too, felt the 
tears well in his eyes, even as Beta did, when they locked 
the door and slowly went down the broad steps to the 
walk he had cleared to the river. 

" Good-by," said the girl simply, and kissed her hand to 
the bungalow. Then he drew his arm about her and together they went on down the path. Very sweet the thickets 
of bright blossoms were; very warm and safe the little 

229 




230 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

garden looked, cut out there frcmi the forest that stood 
guard about it on all sides. 

They lingered one last moment by the sun-dial he had 
carved on a flat boulder, set in  little grassy lawn. The 
shadow of the gnomon fell athwart the IX and touched 
the inscription he had graved about the edge: 

/ MARK NO HOURS BUT BRIGHT ONES. 

Beatrice pondered. 

" We've never had any other kind, together  not one," 
said she, looking up quickly at the man as though with a 
new sort of self-realization. "Do you know that, dear? 
In all this time, never one hour, never one single moment 
of unhappiness or disagreement. Never a harsh word, an 
unkind look or thought.  No hours but bright ones ! ' 
Why, Allan, that's the motto of our lives ! " 

" Yes, of our lives," he repeated gravely. " Our lives, 
forever, as long as we live. But come, come  time's slipping on. See, the shadow's moving ahead already. Q>me, 
say good-by to everything, dear, until next spring. Now 
let's be off and away ! " 

They went aboard the yawl, which, fully laden, now lay 
at a little stone wharf by the edge of the sweet wild wood, 
its mast overhung by arching branches of a Gothic elm. 

Allan cast off the painter of braided leather, and with his 
boat-hook pushed away. He poled out into the current, 
then raised the sail of woven rushes like that of a Giinese 
junk. 

The brisk north wind caught it, the sail crackled, filled 
and bellied hugely. He hauled it tight. A pleasant ripple 
htgdin to murmur at the stern as the yawl gathered speed. 

" Boston and way-stations ! " cried he. But through his 
jest a certain sadness seemed to vibrate. As the wooded 
point swallowed up their bungalow and blotted out all sight 
of their garden in the wilderness, then as the little wharf 
vanished, and nothing now remained but memories, he, too, 
felt the solemnity of a leave-taking which might well be 
eternal. 



TOWARD GREAT CATARACT 231 

Beatrice pressed a spray of golden-rod to her lips. 

" From our garden," said she. " I'm going to keqp it, 
wherever we go." 

" I understand," he answered. " But this is no time, 
now, for retrospection. Everything's sunshine, life, hope  
we've got a world to win ! " 

Then as the yawl heeled to the breeze and foamed away 
down stream with a speed and ease that bore witness to 
the correctness of her lines, he struck up a song, and 
Beatrice joined in, and so their sadness vanished and a 
great, strong, confident joy thrilled both of them at prospect of what was yet to be. 

By mid-afternoon they had safely navigated Harlem River 
and the upper reaches of East River, and were well up 
toward Willett's Point, with Long Island Sound opening 
out before them broadly. 

Of the towns and villages, the estates and magnificent 
palaces that once had adorned the shores of the Sound, no 
trace remained. Nothing was visible but unbroken lines 
of tall, blue forest in the distance; the Sound appeared to 
have grown far wider, and what seemed like a strcmg current set eastward in a manner certainly not produced by 
the tide, all of which puzzled Stern as he held the little 
yawl to her course, sole alone in that vast blue where once 
uncounted thousands of keels had vexed the brine. 

Nightfall found them abreast the ruins of Stamford 
still holding a fair course about five or six miles oflF shore. 

Save for the gulls and one or two quick-scurrying flights 
of Mother Carey's chickens (now larger and swifter thaa 
in the old days), and a single "V" of noisy geese, no 
life had appeared all that afternoon. Stem wondered at 
this. A kind of desolation seemed to lie over the regi<Mi. 

" Ten times more living things in our vicinity back home 
on the Hudson," he remarked to Beatrice, who now lay 
'midships, under the shelter of the cabin, warmly wrapped 
in furs against the keen cutting of the night wind. " It 



I 




232 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

seems as though s(nething had happened around here 
doesn't it? I should have thought the Sound would be 
alive with birds and fish. What can the matter be? " 

She had no hypothesis, and though they talked it over, 
they reached no conclusion. By eight o'clock she fell asleep 
in her warm nest, and Stem steered on alone, by the stars, 
under promise to put into harbor where New Haven once 
had stood, and there himself get some much-needed sleep. 

Swiftly the yawl split the waters of the Sound, for though 
her sail was crude, her body was as fine and speedy as his 
long experience with boats could make it. Something of 
the vast mystery of night and sea penetrated his soul as 
he held the boat on her way. 

The night was moonless ; only the great untroubled stars 
wondered down at this daring venture into the unknown. 

Stem hummed a tune to keep his spirits up. Running 
easily over the monotonous dark swells with a fair following breeze, he passed an hour or two. He sat down, braced 
the tiller, and resigned himself to contemplation of the 
mysteries that had been and that still must be. And very 
sweet to him was the sense of protection, of guardianship, 
wherein he held the sleeping girl, in the shelter of the little 
cabin. 

He must have dozed, sitting there inactive and alone. 
How long? He could not tell. All that he knew was, suddenly, that he had wakened to full consciousness, and that 
a sense of uneasiness, of fear, of peril, hung about him. 

Up he started, with an exclamation which he suppressed 
just in time to avoid waking Beatrice. Through all, over 
all, a vast, dull roar was making itself heard  a sound as 
though of mighty waters rushing, leaping, echoing to the 
sky that droned the echo back again. 

Whence came it? Stem could not tell. From nowhere, 
from everywhere; the hum and vibrant blur of that tremendous sound seemed universal. 

" My God, what's that ? " Allan exclaimed, peering ahead 



 




TOWARD GREAT CATARACT 233 

with eyes widened by a sudden stabbing fear. '' I've got 
Beatrice aboard, here ; I can't let anything happen to her I ' 

The gibbous moon, red and sullen, was just b;inning to 
thmst its strangely mottled face above the uneasy moving 
plain of waters. Far off to southward a dim headland 
showed; even as Stem looked it drifted backward and 
away. 

Suddenly he got a terrifying sense of speed. The headland must have lain five miles to south of him; yet in a 
few moments, even as he watched, it had gone into the 
vague obliteration of a vastly greater distance. 

"What's happening?" thought Stern. The wind had 
died; it seemed as though the waters were moving with 
the wind, as fast as the wind; the yawl was keeping pace 
with it, even as a floating balloon drifts in a storm, unfeeling it. 

Deep, dull, booming, omnious, the roar continued. The 
sail flapped idle on the mast. Stern could distinguish a 
long line of foam that slid away, past the boat, as only 
foam slides on a swift current. 

He peered, in the gloom, to port; and all at once, far 
on the horizon, saw a thing that stopped his heart a moment, then thrashed it into furious activity. 

Off there in a direction he judged as almost due northeast, a tenuous, rising veil of vapor blotted out the lesser 
stars and dimmed the brighter ones. 

Even in that imperfect light he could see something of 
the sinuous drift of that strange cloud. 

Quickly he lashed the tiller, crept forward and climbed 
the mast, his night-glasses slung over his shoulder. 

Holding by one hand, he tried to concentrate his vision 
through the glasses, but they failed to show him even as 
much as the naked eye could discern. 

The sight was paralyzing in its omen of destruction. 
Only too well Stem realized the meaning of the swift, 
strong current, the roar  now ever increasing, ever deep



34 



DARKNESS AND DAWN 



ening in volume  the high and shifting vapor veil that 
climbed toward the dim zenith. 

" Merciful Heaven ! " gulped he. \ There's a cataract 
over there  a terrible chasm  a plunge  to what? And 
we're drifting toward it at express-train speed ! " 



\ 




CHAPTER XI 

THE plunge! 

Dazed though Stern was at his first realization of the iiii 
pending horror, yet through his fear for Beatrice, still 
asleep among her furs, struggled a vast wonder at the 
meaning, the possibility of such a phenomenon. 

How could a current like that rush up along the Sound? 
How could there be a cataract, sucking down the waters 
of the sea itself  whither could it fall? Even at that crisis 
the man's scientific curiosity was aroused; he felt, subconsciously, the interest of the trained observer there in the 
midst of deadly peril. 

But the moment demanded action. 

Quickly Stern dropped to the deck, and, noiseless as a 
cat in his doe-skin sandals, ran aft. 

But even before he had executed the instinctive tactic of 
shifting the helm, paying off, and trying to beat up into 
the faint breeze that now drifted over the swirling current, he realized its futility and abandoned it. 

" No use," thought he. " About as effective as trying 
to dip up the ocean with a spoon. Any use to try the 
sweeps? Maybe she and I together could swing away out 
of the current  make the shore  nothing else to do FU 
try it, anyhow." 

Beside the girl he knelt. 

" Beta ! Beta ! " he whispered in her ear. He shock her 
gently by the arm.  Come, wake up, girlie  there's work 
to do here ! " 

She, submerged in healthy sleep, sighed deeply and mur
23s 



236 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

mured some unintelligible thing; but Stem persisted. And 
in a minute or so there she was, sitting up in the bottom 
of the yawl among the furs. 

In the dim moonlight her face seemed a vague sweet 
flower shadowed by the dark, wind-blown masses of her 
hair. Stern felt the warmth, scented the perftmie of her 
firm, full-blooded flesh. She put a hand to her hair; 
her tiger-skin robe, falling back to the shoulder, revealed her 
white and beautiful arm. 

All at once she drew that arm about the man and brought 
him close to her breast. 

"Oh, Allan!" she breathed. "My boy! Where arc 
we ? What is it ? Oh, I was sleeping so soundly ! Have we 
reached harbor yet? What's that noise  that roaring 
sound ? Surf ? " 

For a moment he could not answer. She, sensing scxne 
trouble, peered closely at him. 

"What is it, Allan?" cried she, her woman's intuition 
telling her of trouble. "Tell me  is anything wrong?' 

" Listen, dearest ! " 

"Yes, what?" 

"We're in some kind of of  " 

"What? Danger?" 

" Well, it may be. I don't know yet. But there's something wrong. You see  " 

" Oh, Allan ! " she exclaimed, and started up. 
didn't you waken me before? What is it? What 
do to help ? " 

" I think there's rough water ahead, dear," th( 
answered, trying to steady his voice, which sh( 
in spite of him. " At any rate, it sounds like a 
of some kind or other; and see, there's a line, a 
vapor rising over there. We're being carried towai 
a strong current." 

Anxiously she peered, now full awake. Then shdl.)|Kmed 
to Allan. f, 

"Can't we sail away?" t 





THE PLUNGE! 37 



' Not enough wind. We might possibly row out of tile 
current, and  and perhaps  " 

" Give me one of the sweeps quick, quick I " 

He put the sweeps out. No sooner had he braced himself against a rib of the yawl and thrown his muscles against 
the heavy bar than she, too, was pulling hard. 

"Not too strong at first, dear," he cautioned "Don't 
use up all your strength in the first few minutes. We may 
have a long fight for it ! " 

" Tm in it with you  till the end  whichever way it 
ends," she answered ; and in the moonlight he saw the untrammeled swing and play of her magnificent body. 

The yawl came round slowly till it was crosswise to the 
current, headed toward the mainland shore. Now it began 
to make a little headway. But the breeze slightly impeded it. 

Stem whipped out his knife and slashed the sheets of 
platted rush. The sail crumpled, crackled and slid down; 
and now under a bare pole the boat cradled slowly ahead 
transversely across the foam-streaked current that ran 
swiftly soughing toward the dim vapor-swirls away to the 
northeast. 

No word was spoken now. Both Beatrice and Stem lay 
to the sweeps; both braced themselves and put the full 
force of back and arms into each long, powerful stroke. 
Yet Stern could see that, at the rate of progress they were 
makiM, over that black and oily swirl, they could not gain 
ten IHrwhile the current was carrying them a thousand. 

InZdb heart he knew the futility of the fight, yet still 
he fpEnt. Still Beatrice fought for life, too, there by his 
side." Himian instinct, the will to live, drove them on, on, 
where both understood there was no hope. 

For now already the current had quickened still more. 
The breeze had sprung up from the opposite direction ; Stem 
knew the boiling rush of waters had already reached a 
speed greater than that of the wind itself. No longer 
the stars trembled, reflected, in the waters. All ugly, froth


 




238 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

ing, broken, the swift current foamed and leaped, in long, 
horrible gulfs and crests of sickening velocity. 

And whirlpools now began to form. The yawl was 
twisted like a straw, wrenched, hurled, flung about with 
sickening violence. 

" Row ! Row! " Stem cried none the less. And his 
muscles bunched and hardened with the labor; his veins 
stood out, and sweat dropped from his brow, ran into his 
eyes, and all but blinded him. 

The girl, too, was laboring with all her might. Stem 
heard her breath, gasping and quick, above the roar and 
swash of the mad waters. And all at once revulsion seized 
him  rage, and a kind of mad exultation, a defiance of it all. 

He dropped the sweep and sprang to her. 

" Beta ! " he shouted, louder than the droning tumult 
" No use ! No use at all ! Here  come to me ! " 

He drew the sweep inboard and flung it in the bottom 
of the yawl. 

Already the vapors of the cataract ahead were drifting 
over them and driving in their faces. A vibrant booming 
shuddered through the dark air, where now even the moon's 
faint light was all extinguished by the whirling mists. 

Heaven and sea shook with the terrible concussion of 
falling waters. Though Stern had shouted, yet the girl 
could not have heard him now. 

In the gloom he peered at her; he took her in his arms. 
Her face was pale, but very calm. She showed no more 
fear than the man ; each seemed inspired with some strange 
exultant thought of death, there with the other. 

He drew her to his breast and covered her face; he 
knelt with her among the heaped-up furs, and then, as the \ 
yawl plunged more violently still, they sank down in the 
poor shelter of the cabin and waited.  

His arms were about her; her face was buried on his 
breast. He smoothed her hair ; his Hpys pressed her forehead. 

" Good-by ! " he whispered, though she could not hear. 

They seemed now to hover on the very brink. 



THEPLUNGE! 239 

A long, racing sluicelike incline of black waters, streaked 
with swirls of white, appeared before them. The boat 
plunged and whirled, dipped, righted, and sped on. 

Behind, a huge, rushing, wall-like mass of lathering, leaping surges. In front, a vast nothingness, a black, unfathomable void, up through which gushed in clouds the mighty 
jets of vapor. 

Came a lurch, a swift plunge. 

The boat hung suspended a moment. 

Stem saw what seemed a long, clear, greenish slant of 
water. Deafened and dazed by the infernal pandemonium 
of noise, he bowed his head on hers, and his arms tightened. 

Suddenly everything dropped away. The universe 
crashed and bellowed. 

Stern felt a heavy dash of brine cold, strangling, irresistible. 

All grew black. 

"Death! " thought he, and knew no more. 




CHAPTER XII 

TRAPPED ON THE LEDGE 

Consciousness won back to Allan Stem  how long afterward he could not tell  under the gise of a vast roaring 
tumult, a deafening thunder that rose, fell, leaped aloft 
again in huge, titanic cadences of sound. 

And coupled with this glimmering sense-impression, he 
felt the drive of water over him; he saw, vaguely as in 
the memory of a dream, a dim gray light that weakly filtered through the gloom. 

Weak, sick, dazed, the man realized that he still lived; 
and to his mind the thought " Beatrice ! " flashed back again. 

With a tremendous effort, gasping and shaken, weak, 
unnerved and wounded, he managed to raise himself upon 
one elbow and to peer about him with wild eyes. 

A strange scene that. Even in the half light, with all his 
senses distorted by confusion and by pain, he made shift 
to comprehend a little of what he saw. 

He understood that, by some fluke of fate, life still 
remained in him; that, in some way he never could discover, he had been cast upon a ledge of rock there in the 
cataract  a ledge over which spray and foam hurled, seething, yet a ledge which, parting the gigantic flood, offered 
a chance of temporary safety. 

Above him, sweeping in a vast smooth torrent of clear 
green, he saw the steady downpour of the falls. Out at 
cither side, as he lay there still unable to rise, he caught 
glimpses through the spume-drive, glimpses of swift white 
water, that broke and creamed as it whirled past ; that jetted 

240 




TRAPPED ON THE LEDGE 141 

high ; that, hissing, swept away, away, to unknown dqyths 
below that narrow, slippery ledge. 

Realization of all this had hardly forced itself upon his 
dazed perceptions when a stronger recrudescence of his 
thought about the girl surged back upon him. 

''Beatrice! Beatrice!'' he gasped, and struggled up. 

On hands and knees, groping, half-blinded, deafened, he 
began to crawl; and as he crawled, he shouted the girl's 
name, but the thundering of the vast tourbillions and eddies 
that swirled about the rock, white and ravening, drowned 
his voice. Vague yet terrible, in the light of the dim moon 
that filtered through the mists, the racing flood howled past 
And in Stem's heart, as he now came to more and better 
understanding, a vast despair took shape, a sickening fear 
surged up. 

Again he shouted, chokingly, creeping along the slippery 
ledge. Through the driving mists he peered with agonized 
eyes. Where was the yawl now ? Where the girl ? Down 
there in that insane welter of the mad torrent  swept away 
long since to annihilation? The thought maddened him, 

Qutching a projection of the rock, he hauled himself up 
to his feet, and for a moment stood there, swaying, a strange, 
tattered, dripping figure in the dim moonlight, wounded, 
breathless and disheveled, with bloodshot eyes that sought 
to pierce the hissing spray. 

All at once he gulped some unintelligible thing and staggered forward. 

There, wedged in a crevice, he had caught sight of something  what it was he could not tell, but toward it now 
he stumbled. 

He reached the thing. Sobbing with realization of his 
incalculable loss and of the wreckage of all their hopes and 
plans and all that life had meant, he fell upon his knees 
beside the object. 

He groped about it as though blind ; he felt that formless 
mass of debris, a few shattered planks and part of the 
woven sail, now jammed into the fissure in the ledge. And 



# 




242 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

at touch of all that remained to him, he crouched there, 
ghastly pale and racked with unspeakable anguish. 

But hope and the indomitable spirit of the hiunan heart 
still urged him on. The further end of the ledge, overdashed with wild jets of spray and stinging drives of brine, 
still remained unexplored. And toward this now he crept, 
bit by bit, fighting his way along, now clinging as some 
more savage surge leaped over, now battling forward on 
hands and knees along the perilous strip of stone. 

One false move, he knew, one slip and all was over. He, 
too, like the yawl itself, and perhaps like Beatrice, would 
whirl and fling away down, down, into the nameless nothingness of that abyss. 

Better thus, he dimly realized, better, after all, than to 
cling to the ledge in case he could not find her. For it 
must be only a matter of time, and no very long time at 
that, when exhaustion and starvation would weaken him 
and when he must inevitably be swept away. 

And in his mind he knew the future, which voiced itself 
in a half-spoken groan: 

"If she's not there, or if she's there, but dead  good-by I " 

Even as he sensed the truth he found her. Sheltered 
behind a jutting spur of granite, Beatrice was lying, where 
the shock of the impact had thrown her when the yawl 
had struck the ledge. t 

Drenched and draggled in her water-soaked tiger-skin, 
her long hair tangled and disheveled over the rock, she lay 
as though asleep. 

"Dead?" gasped Allan, and caught her in his arms, all 
limp and cold. Back from her brow he flung the brinesoaked hair ; he kissed her forehead and her lips, and with 
trembling hands began to chafe her face, her throat, her 
arms.  

To her breast he laid his ear, listening for some flicker 
of life, some promise of vitality again. 

And as he sensed a slight yet rh3rthmic pulsing there  
as he detected a faint breath, so vast a gratitude and love 



TRAPPED ON THE LEDGE 243 

engulfed him that for a moment all grew dazed and shaken 
and unreal. 

He had to brace himself, to struggle for self-mastery. 

" Beta ! Beta 1 " he cried. " Oh, my God ! You live 
you live ! " 

Dripping water, unconscious, lithe, she lay within his 
clasp, now strong again. Forgotten his weakness and his 
pain, his bruises, his wounds, his fear. All had vanished 
from his consciousness with the one supreme realization  
"She lives!" 

Back along the ledge he bore her, not slipping now, not 
crouching, but erect and bold and powerful, nerved to that 
effort and that daring by the urge of the great love that 
flamed through all his veins. 

Back he bore her to the comparative safety of the other 
end, where only an occasional breaker creamed across the 
rock and where, behind a narrow shelf that projected diag 
onally upward and outward, he laid his precious burden 
down. 

And now again he called her name ; he rubbed and chafed 
her. 

Only joy filled his soul. Nothing else mattered now. 
The total loss of their yawl and all its precious contents, 
the wreck of their expedition almost at its very start, the 
fact that Beatrice and he were now alone upon a narrow 
ledge of granite in the midst of a stupendous cataract that 
drained the ocean down to unknown, unthinkable depths, the 
knowledge that she and he now were without arms, ammunition, food, shelter, fire, anything at all, defenseless 
in a wilderness such as no humans ever yet had faced  
all this meant nothing to Allan Stem. 

For he had her; and as at last her lids twitched, then 
opened, and her dazed eyes looked at him; as she tried to 
struggle up while he restrained her; as she chokingly 
called his name and stretched a tremulous hand to him, 
there in the thunderous half light of the falls, he knew he 



i 




244 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

could not ask for greater joy, though all of civilization and 
of power might be his, without her. 

In his own soul he knew he would choose this abandonment and all this desperate peril with Beatrice, rather than 
safety, comfort, luxury, and the whole world as it once 
had been apart from her. 

Yet, as sometimes happens in the supreme crises of life, 
his first spoken word was commonplace enough. 

" There, there, lie still ! " he commanded, drawing her 
close to his breast. " You're all right, now  just keep quiet, 
Beatrice ! " 

" What what's happened" she gasped. " Where f " 

"Just a little accident, that's all," he soothed the frightened girl. Dazed by the roaring cadence of the torrent, 
'she shuddered and hid her face against him ; and his arms 
protected her as he crouched there beside her in the scant 
shelter of the rocky shelf. 

" We got carried over a waterfall, or something of that 
ort,". he added. " We're on a ledge in the river, or whatever it is, and  " 

 You're hurt, Allan ? " 

" No, no  are you?" 

" It's nothing, boy ! " She looked up again, and even 
in the dim light he saw her try to smile. " Nothing matters 
so long as we have each other ! " 

Silence between them for a moment, while he drew her 
close and kissed her. He questioned her again, but found 
that save for bruises and a cruel blow on the temple, she 
had taken no hurt in the plunge that had stunned her. 
Both, they must have been flung from the yawl when it 
had gone to pieces. How long they had lain upon the rock 
they knew not. All they could know was that the light 
woodwork of the boat had been dashed away with their 
supplies and that now they again faced the world emptyhanded  provided even that escape were possible from the 
midst of that mad torrent. 

An hour or so they huddled in the shelter of the rocky 




TRAPPED ON THE LEDQE 245 

shdf till strength and some djee of calm returned and 
till the growing light far off to eastward through the haze 
and mist told tihem that day was dawning again. 

Then Allan set to work exploring once more carefully 
their little islet in the swirling flood. 

" You stay here, Beta," said he. ' So long as you keep 
back of this projection you're safe. I'm going to see just 
what the prospect is." 

' Oh, be careful, Allan ! " she entreated. " Be so very, 
very careful, won't you?" 

He promised and left her. Then, cautiously, stq> by 
step, he made his way along the ledge in the other direction 
irom. that where he had found the senseless girl. 

To the very end of the ledge he penetrated, but found 
no hope. Nothing was to be seen through the mists save 
the mad foam-rush of the waters that leaped and bounded 
like white-maned horses in a race of death. Bold as the 
man was, he dared not look for long. Dizziness threatened 
to overwhelm him with sickening lure, its invitation to the. 
plunge. So, realizing that nothing was to be gained by 
staying there, he drew back and once more sought Beatrice. 

"Any way out?" she asked him, anxiously, her voice 
sounding clear and pure through the tumult of the rushing 
waters. 

He shook his head, despairingly. And silence fell again, 
and each sat thinking long, long thoughts, and dawn came 
creeping grayly through the spume-drive of the giant falls. 

More than an hour must have passed before Stem noted 
a strange phenomenon  an hour in which they had said 
few words  an hour in which both had abandoned hopes of 
life  and in which, she in her own way, he in his, they 
had reconciled themselves to the inevitable. 

But at last, "What's that?" exclaimed the man; for 
now a different tone resounded in the cataract, a louder, 
angrier note, as though the plunge of waters at the bottom 
had in some strange, mysterious way drawn nearer. 
 What's that ? " he asked again. 



i 




24,6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Below there somewhere by the tenebrous light of morning he could see  or thought that he could see  a green, 
dim, vaguely tossing drive of waters that now vanished in 
the whirling mists, now showed again and now again grew 
hidden. 

Out to the edge of the rocky shelf he crept once more. 
Yes, for a certainty, now he could make out the seething 
plunge of the waters as they roared into the foam-lashed 
flood below. 

But how could this be? Stern's wonder sought to grasp 
analysis of the strange phenomenon. 

" If it's true that the water at the bottom's rising," thought 
he,  then there must either be some kind of tide in that 
body of water or else the cavity itself must be filling up. 
In either case, what if the process continues?" 

And instantly a new fear smote him  a fear wherein 
lay buried like a fly in amber a hope for life, the only hope 
that had yet come to him since his awakening there in that 
trap sealed round by sluicing maelstroms. 

He watched a few moments longer, then with a fresh 
resolve, desperate yet joyful in its strength, once more 
sought the girl. 

" Bela," said he, " how brave are you ? " 

"How brave? Why, dear?" 

He paused a moment, then replied : " Because, if what 
I believe is true, in a few minutes you and I have got to 
make a fight for life  a harder fight than any we've made 
yet  a fight that may last for hours and may, after all, end 
only in death. A battle royal ! Are you strong for it ? Are 
you brave?" 

" Try me ! " she answered, and their eyes met, and he 
knew the truth, that come what might of life or death, of 
loss or gain, defeat or victory, this woman was to be his 
mate and equal to the end. 

" Listen, then ! " he commanded. " This is our last, our 
only chance. And if it fails  " 




 



.T 



CHAPTER XIII 

ON THE CREST OF THE MAELSTROM 

Stern's observation of the rising flood proved correct. By 
whatever theory it might or might not be explained, the 
fact was positive that now the water there below them 
was rising fast, and that inside of half an hour at the outside the torrent would engulf their ledge. 

It seemed as though there must be some vast, rhjrthmic 
ebb and flux in the unsounded abysses that yawned beneath 
them, some incalculable regurgitation of the sea, which 
periodically spewed forth a part, at least, of the enormous 
torrent that for hours poured into that titanic gulf. 

And it was upon this flux, stormy and wild and full of 
seething whirlpools, that Allan Stern and the girl now 
built their only possible hope of salvation and of life. 

" Come, we must be at work ! " he told her, as together 
they peered over the edge and now beheld the weltering 
flood creeping up, up along the thunderous plunge of the 
waterfall till it was within no more than a hundred feet of 
their shelter. 

As the depth of the fall decreased the spray-drive lessened, and now, with the full coming of day, some reflection 
of the golden morning sky crept through the spray. Yet 
: neither to right nor left could they see shore or anything 
' save that long, swift, sliding wall of brine, foam-tossed and 
terrible. 

" To work ! " said he again. " If we're going to save 
ourselves out of this inferno we've got to make some kind 
of preparation. We can't just swim and trust to luck. 

247 



# 




248 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

We shall have to make a float of some sort or other I 
think." 

" Yes, but what with ? " asked she. 

" With what remains of the yawl ! " 

And even as he spoke he led the way to the crevice where 
the splintered boards and the torn sail had been wedged fast 

" A slim hope, I know," he admitted, " but it's all we've 
got now." 

Driven home as the wreckage was by the terrific impact 
of the blow. Stem had a man's work cut out for him to 
get it clear; but his was as the strength of ten, and before 
half an hour had passed he had, with the girl's help, freed 
all the planks and laid them out along the rock-shelf, the 
most sheltered spot of the ledge. 

Another hour later the planks had been lashed into a 
rough sort of float with what cordage remained and with 
platted strips of the mat sail. 

" It's not half big enough to hold us up altogether," 
judged the man, "but if we merely use it to keep our heads 
out of water it will serve, and it's got the merit of being 
unsinkable, anyhow. God knows how long we may have 
to be in the water, little girl. But whatever comes we've 
got to face it. There's no other chance at all ! " 

They waited now calmly, with the resignation of those 
who have no alternative to hardship. And steadily the 
flood mounted up, up, toward the ledge, and now the seethe 
was very near. Now already the leaping froth of the plunge 
was dashing up against their rock. In a few moments the 
shelter would be submerged. 

He put his lips close to her ear, forpw his voice could 
not carry.  

"Let's jump for it!" he cried. 'If we wait till the 
flood reaches us here we'll be crushed against the rock. 
Come on, Beatrice, we've got to plunge ! " 

She answered with her eyes ; he knew the girl was ready. 
To him he drew her and their kiss was one that spoke 
eternal farewell. But of this thought no word passed their 
lips. 



ON CREST OF THE MAELSTROM349 

'' Come! " bade the man once more. 

How they leaped into that vortex of mad waters, how 
they vanished in that thunderous welter, rose, sank, fotit, 
strangled, rose again and caught the air, and once more 
were whirled down and buried in that crushing avalanche ; 
how they clung to the lashed planks and with these spiraled 
in mad sarabands among the whirlpools and green eddies; 
how they were flung out into smoother water, blinded and 
deafened, yet with still the spark of life and consciousness 
within them, and how they let the frail raft bear them, 
fainting and dazed, all their senses concentrated just on 
gripping this support  all this they never could have told. 

Stem knew at last, with something of clarity, that he 
was floating easily along an oily current which ran, undulating, beneath a slate-gray mist; he realized that with one 
hand he was grasping the planks, with the other arm upbearing the girl. 

Pale and with closed eyes, she lay there in the hcJlow 
of his arm, her face free from water, her long hair floating 
out upon the tide. 

He saw her lids twitch and knew she lived. Yet even 
as he thanked God and took a firmer hold on her, consciousness lapsed again, and with it all realizatbn of time or of 
events. 

Yet though the moments  or were they hours?  whidi 
followed left no impress on his brain, some intelligence 
must have directed Stern. For when once more he knew, 
he found the mist and fog all gone; he saw a golden sun 
that weltered all across the heaving flood in a brave splendor ; and, off to noi:thward, a wooded line of hills, blue in 
the distance, yet beautiful with their promise of salvation. 

Stem understood, then, what must have happened. He 
saw that the upfilling of the abyss, whatever might have 
caused it, had flung them forth; he perceived that the 
temporary flood which had taken place before once more 
another terrific down-draft should pour into the gaping 
chasm, had cast them out, floated by their raft of planks, 



250 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

even as match-straws might be flung and floated on the outburst of a geyser. 

He understood; he knew that, fortune favoring, life 
still beckoned there ahead. 

And in his heart resolve leaped up. 

"Life! Lifel" he cried. "Oh, Beatrice, look! Seel 
There's land ahead, there  land!' 

But the girl, still circled by his arm, lay senseless. Allan 
knew he could make no progress in that manner. So by 
dint of great labor, he managed to draw her somewhat onto 
the float and there to lash her with a loose end of cordage 
in such wise that she could breathe with no danger of 
drowning. 

Himself he summoned all his forces, and now b;an to 
swim through the smooth tides, which, warm with some 
grateful heat, vastly unlike the usual ocean chill, stretched 
lazily rolling away and away to that far off shore. 

That day was long and bitter, an agony of toil, hope, 
despair, labor and struggle, and the girl, reviving, shared 
it toward the end. Only their frail raft fenced death away, 
but so long as the buoyant planks held together they could 
not drown. 

Thirst and exhaustion tortured them, but there was no 
hope of appeal to any help! In this manless world there 
could be no rescue. Here, there, a few gulls wheeled and 
screamed above the flood ; and once a sci|Ool of porpoises, 
glistening as they curved their shining backs in long leaps 
through the brine, played past. Allan and the girl envied 
the creatures, and renewed their fight for life. 

The south wind favored, and what seemed a landward 
current drew them on. Their own strength, too, in spite 
of the long fast and the incredible hardships, held out well. 
For now that civilization was a thing of the oblivious past, 
they shared the vital forces and the very powers of Mother 
Nature herself. And, like two favored children of that 
all-mother, they slowly made their way to land. 

Night found them utterly exhausted and soaked to the 




ON CREST OF THE MAELSTROM2S1 

marrow, yet alive, stretched out at full length, inert, upon 
the warm sands of a virgin beach. There they lay, supine, 
above high tide, whither they had dragged themselves with 
terrible exertion. And the stars wheeled overhead; and 
down upon them the strange-featured moon wondered with 
her pallid gleam. 

Fireless, foodless and without shelter, unprotected to 
every way, possessing nothing now save just their own 
bodies and the draggled garments that they wore, they lay 
and slept In their supreme exhaustion they risked attack 
from wild beasts and from anthropoids. Sleep to them 
was now the one vital, inevitable necessity. 

Thus the long night hours passed and strength revived in 
them, up-welling like fresh tides of life; and once more a 
new day grayed the east, then transmuted to bright gold 
and blazoned its insignia all up the eastern sky. 

Stem woke first, dazed with the long sleep, toward midmorning. A little while he lay as though adream, trying 
to realize what had happened; but soon remembrance 
knitted up the fabric of the peril and the close escape. And, 
arising stiffly from the sand, he stretched his splendid 
muscles, rubbed his eyes, and stared about him. 

A burning thirst was tormenting him. His tongue clave 
to the roof of his mouth ; he found, by trial, that he could 
scarcely swallow. 

" Water ! " gasped he, and peered at the deep green 
woods, which promised abundant brooks and streams. 

But before he started on that quest he looked to see that 
Beatrice was safe and sound. The girl still slept. Bending above her he made sure that she was resting easily and 
that she had taken no harm. But the sun, he saw, was 
shining in her face. 

" ITiat won't do at all ! " he thought ; and now with a 
double motive he strode off up the beach, toward the 
dense forest that grew down to the line of shifting sands. 

Ten minutes and he had discovered a spring that bubbled out beneath a moss-hung rock, a spring whereof he 




252 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

drank till renewed life ran through his vigorous body. And 
after that he sought and found with no great labor a tree 
of the same species of breadfruit that grew all about their 
bungalow on the Hudson. 

Then, bearing branches of fruit, and a huge, f ronded tuft 
of the giant fern-trees that abounded there, he came back 
down the beach to the sleeping girl, who still lay unconscious 
in her tiger-skin, her heavy hair spread drying on the sands, 
her face buried in the warm, soft hollow of her arm. 

He thrust the stalk of the fern-tree branch far down 
into the sand, bending it so that the thick leaves shaded her. 
He ate plentifully of the fruit and left much for her. Then 
he knelt and kissed her forehead lightly, and with a smile 
upon his lips set off along the beach. 

A rocky point that rose boldly against the mornings a 
quarter-mile to southward, was his objective. 

" Whatever's to be seen round here can be seen from 
there," said he. " I've got my job cut out for me, all right 
 here we are, stranded, without a thing to serve us, no 
tools, weapons or implements or supplies of any kind  nothing but our bare hands to work with, and hundreds of miles 
between us and the place we call home. No boat, no conveyance at all. Unknown country, full of God knows what 
perils ! " 

Thinking, he strode along the fine, smooth, even sands, 
where never yet a human foot had trodden. For the first 
time he seemed to realize just what this world now meant  
a world devoid of others of his kind. While the girl and 
he had been among the ruins of Manhattan, or even on the 
Hudson, they had felt some contact with the past ; but here, 
Stern's eye looked out over a world as virgin as on the 
primal morn. And a vast loneliness assailed him, a yearning almost insupportable, that made him clench his fists and 
raise them to the impassive, empty sky that mocked him with 
its deep and azure calm. 

But from the rocky point, when he had scaled its height, 
he saw far off to westward a rising column of vapor which 




ON CREST OF THE MAELSTROM2S3 

for a while diverted his thotights. He recognized the col 
umn, even though he could not hear the disUnt roaring of 
the cataract he knew lay under it. And, standing erect 
and tall on the topmost pinnacle, eyes shaded under his levd 
hand, he studied the strange sight. 

" Yes, the flood's rushing in again, down that vast chasm/' 
he exclainied. " The chasm that nearly proved a grave to 
us ! And every day the same thing happens  but how and 
why? By Jove, here's a problem worthy a bigger brain 
than mine! 

" Well, I can't solve it now. And there's enough to do, 
without bothering about the maelstrom except to avoid 
it!" 

He swept the sea with his gaze. Far off to southward 
lay a dim, dark line, which at one time must have been 
Long Island; but it was irregular now, and faint, and 
showed that the island had been practically submerged or 
swept away by the vast geodetic changes of the age since 
the catastrophe. 

A broken shore-line, heavily wooded, stretched to east 
and west. Stem sought in vain for any landmark which 
might give him position on a shore once so familiar to 
him. Whether he now stood near the former site of New 
Haven, whether he was in the vicinity of the one-time 
mouth of the Connecticut River, or whether the shore where 
he now stood had once been Rhode Island, there was no 
means of telling. Even the far line of land on the horizon 
could not guide him. 

"If that is some remnant of Long Island," he mused, 
" it would indicate that we're no further east than the Connecticut ; but there's no way to be sure. Other islands may 
have been heaved up from the ocean floor.. There's nothing definite or certain about anything now, except that 
we're both alive, without a thing to help us but our wits, 
and that I'm starving for something more substantial than 
that breadfruit ! " 

Wherewith he went back to Beatrice. 



9 




254 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

He found her, awake at last, sitting on the beach under 
the shadow of the fern-tree branch> shaking out her hair 
and braiding it in two thick plaits. He brought her water 
in a cup deftly fashioned from a huge leaf ; and when she 
had drunk and eaten some of the fruit they sat and talked 
a while in the grateful warmth of the sun. 

She seemed depressed and disheartened, at last, as they 
discussed what had happened and spoke of the future. 

" This last misfortune, Allan," said she, " is too much. 
There's nothing now except life  ' 

"Which is everything!" he interrupted, laughing. "If 
we can weather a time like that, nothing in store for us can 
have any terrors !  His own spirits rose fast while he 
cheered the girl. 

He drew his arm about her as they sat together on the 
beach. 

" Just be patient, that's all," bade he. " Just give me a 
day or so to find out our location, and I'll get things going 
again, never fear. A week from now we may be sailing 
into Boston Harbor  who knows?" 

And, shipwrecked and destitute though they were, alone 
in the vast emptiness of that deserted world, yet with his 
optimism and his faith he coaxed her back to cheerfulness 
and smiles again. 

 The whole earth is ours, and the fulness thereof I " he 
cried, and flung his arms defiantly outward. " This is no 
time for hesitance or fear. Victory lies all before us yet. 
To work ! To work 1 ' 




CHAPTER XIV 

A FRESH START 

Indomitably the human spirit, temporarily beaten down 
and crushed by misfortunes beyond all calculation, once 
more rose in renewed strength to the tremendous task 
ahead. And, first of all. Stern and the girl made a camping place in the edge of the forest, close by the spring under 
the big rock. 

" We've got to have a base of supplies, or scnnething of 
that sort," the man declared. " We can't start trekking away 
into the wilderness at once, without consideration and at 
least some definite place where we can store a few necessaries and to which we can retreat, in case of need. A camp, 
and  if possible  a fire, these are our first requisites." 

Their camp they built (regardless of the protests of birds 
and squirrels and many little woodland folk) roughly, yet 
strongly enough to offer protection from the rain, under a 
thick-leaved oak, which in itself gave shelter. This oak, 
through whose branches darted many a gay-plumaged bird 
of species unknown to Stern, grew up along the overhanging face of Spring Rock, as they christened it. 

By filling in the space between the rock and the bole of 
the oak with moss and stones, and then by building a heavy 
lean-to roof of leafy branches, thatched with lashed bundles 
of marsh-grass, they constructed in two days a fairly comfortable shack, hard by an abundant, never-failing supply 
of the finest water ever a human set lip to. 

Here Stem piled fragrant grasses in great quantity for 
the girl's bed. He himself volunteered to sleep at the door
255 




256 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

 way, on guard with his only weapon  a jagged boulder 
lashed with leather thongs to a four-foot haft, even in the 
very fashion of the neolithic ancestors of man. 

Their food supply reverted to such berries and fruits as 
they could gather in the fringes of the forest, for as yet 
they dared not penetrate far from the shore. To these 
they added a plentiful supply of clams, which they dug 
with sharp sticks, at low tide, far out across the sand 
flats  toiling for all the world like two of the identical 
savages who in the long ago, a thousand or five thousand 
years before the white man came to America, had left shell 
heap middens along the north Atlantic coast. 

This shell-fish gathering brought the action of the tides to 
their careful attention. The tide, they found, behaved in 
an erratic manner. Instead of two regular flows a day 
there was but one. And at the ebb more than two miles of 
beach and sea-bottom lay exposed below the spot where 
they had landed at the flood. Stem analyzed the probable 
cause of this phenomenon. 

" There must be two regular tides," he said, " only they're 
lost in the far larger flux and reflux caused by the vortex 
we escaped from. Any marine geyser like that, able to 
suck down water enough from the sea to lay bare two 
miles of beach every day and capable of throwing a column 
of mist and spray like that 2lctoss the sky, is worth investigating. Some day you and I are going to know more about 
it  a lot more ! " 

And that was truth; but little the engineer suspected 
how soon, or under what surpassingly strange circumstances, the girl and he were destined to behold once more 
the workings of that terrible and mighty force. 

On the third day Stem set himself to work on the problem of making fire. He had not even flint-and-steel now, 
nor any firearm. Had he possessed a pistol he could have 
collected a little birch-bark, sought out a rotten pine-stump, 
and discharged his weapon into the " punk," then blown the 
glow to a flame, and almost certainly have got a blaze. But 




A FRESH START 257 

he lacked everything, and so was forced back to prhnitiv 
man's one simplest resource  friction. 

As an assistant instructor in anthropology at Harvard 
University, he had now and then producol fire for his 
dass of expectant students by using tiie Peruvian fire-drill ; 
but even this simple expedient required a head-strap and a 
jade bearing, a well-formed spindle and a bow. Stem had 
none of these things, neither could he fashion them without 
tools. He had, therefore, to resort to the still more primitive method of " fire-sawing," such as long, long ago the 
Australian bushmen had been wont to practise. 

He was a strong man, determined and persistent ; but two 
days more had passed, and many blisters covered his palms 
ere  af ter innumerable experiments with different kinds of 
woods and varying strokes  the first tiny glow fell into the 
carefully scraped sawdust. And it was with a fast-beating 
heart and tremulous breath that he blew his spark to a 
larger one, then laid on his shredded strips of bark and 
blew again, and so at last, with a great up-welling triumph 
in his soul, beheld the flicker of a flame once more. 

Exhausted, he carefully fed that precious fire, while the 
girl clapped her hands with joy. In a few moments more 
the evening air in the dim forest aisles was gladdened by 
the ruddy blaze of a camp-fire at the door of the lean-to, 
and for the first time smoke went wafting up among the 
branches of that primeval wood. 

" Now for some real meat ! " cried Stem with exultation. 
" To-morrow I go hunting ! " 

That evening they sat for hours feeding their fire with 
deadfalls, listening to the trickle of the little spring and to 
the night sounds of the forest, watching the bats flicker, 
among the dusky spaces, and gazing at the slow and solenm 
march of the stars beyond the leafy fretwork overhead. 
Stem slept but little that night, in his anxiety to keep the 
fire fed ; and morning found him eager to be at his work 
with throwing-sticks among the vistas of the wilderness. 

Together they hunted that day. She carried what his 




258 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

skilful aim brought down from the tangled greenery above. 
Birds, squirrels, chipmunks, all were welcome. Noon found 
them in possession of more than thirty pieces of small game, 
including two hedgehogs. And for the first time in sJmost 
a week they tasted flesh again, roasted on a sharp stick over 
the glowing coals. 

Stern hunted all that day and the next. He dressed the 
game with an extraordinarily large and sharp clamshell, 
which he whetted from time to time on a rock beside the 
spring. And soon the fire was overhung with much meat, 
being smoked with a pine-cone smudge ift preparation for 
the journey into the unknown. 

" Inside of a week, at this rate," he judged, " well be 
able to start again. You must set to work platting a couple 
of sacks. The grass along the brook is tough and long. 
We can carry fifty or seventy-five pounds of meat, for 
emergencies. Fruits we can gather on the way." 

 And fire ? Can we carry that ? " 

" We can take a supply of properly dried-out wood, 
with punk. IVe already had practise enough, so I ought 
to be able to get fire at any time inside of half an hour." 

" Weapons ? " 

"Fll make you a battle-ax like my own, only lighter. 
That's the best we can do for the present, till we strike 
some ruin or other where a city used to be." 

" And you Ve still bent on reaching Boston ? " 

" Yes. I reckon we're more than half-way there by now. 
It's the nearest big ruin, the nearest place where we can 
refit and recoup the damage done, get supplies and arms 
and tools, build another boat, and in general take a fresh 
start. If we can make ten miles a day, we can reach it in 
ten days or less. I think, all things considered, the Boston 
plan's the wisest possible one." 

She gazed into the fire a moment before replying. Then, 
stirring the coals with a stick, said she : 

" All right, boy ; but I've got a suggestion to make. 

'Whatisit?" 



A FRESH START 259 

" We'll do better to follow the shore all the way round." 

" And double the distance ? " 

" Yes, even so. You know, this shore is  or used to 1)e 
 flat and sandy most of the way. We can make better 
progress along beaches and levels than we can through the 
forest. And there's the matter of shell-fish to consider; 
and most important of all  " 

"Well, what?" 

" The sea will guide us. We can't get lost, you understand. With the exception of cutting across the shank of 
Cape Cod, if the cape still exists, we needn't ever get out of 
sight of salt water. And it will bring us surely to the Hub." 

" By Jove, you're right ! " he cried enthusiastically. " The 
shore-line has it! And tomorrow morning at sunup we 
begin preparations in earnest. You'll weave the knapsacks 
while I go after still more meat. Gad! Now that everything's decided, the quicker we're on our way the better. 
Fm keen to see old Tremont Hill again, and get my hands 
on a good stock of arms and ammunition once more!" 

That night, long after Beatrice was sleeping soundly on 
her bed of odorous glasses, Allan lay musing by the lean-to 
door, in the red glow of the fire. He was thinking of the 
long and painful history of man, of the great catastrophe 
and of the terrible responsibility that now lay on his own 
shoulders. 

As in a panorama, he saw the emergence of humanity 
from the animal stage, the primitive savagery of his kind; 
then the beginnings of the family, the nomadic epoch, the 
stone age, and the bronze age, and the age of iron ; the struggle up to agriculturalism, and communism, and the beginnings of the village groups, with all their petty tribal wars. 

He saw the slow formation of small states, the era of 
slavery, then feudalism and serfdom, and at last the birth 
of modern nations, the development of machinery, and the 
vast nexus of exploitation known as capitalism  the stage 
which at one blow had been utterly destroyed just as it 
had been transmuting into collectivism. 




26o DARKNESS AND DAWN 

And at thought of this Stern felt a pang of infinite 
regret. 

" The whole evolutionary process wiped out," mused he, 
" just as it was about to pass into its perfect form, toward 
which the history of all the ages had conspired, for which 
oceans of blood had been spilled and millions of men and 
women  billions!  lived and toiled and died! 

" All gone, all vanished  it's all been in vain, the woe 
and travail of the world since time began, unless she and 
I, just we two, preserve the memory and the knowledge 
of the world's long, bitter fight, and hand them down to 
strong descendants. 

" Our problem is to bridge this gap, to keep the fires of 
science and of truth alive, and, if that be possible, to start 
the world again on a higher plane, where all the harsh and 
terrible phases will no longer have to be lived through again. 
Our problem and our task ! Were ever two beings weighed 
by such a one?" 

And as he pondered, in the firelight, his thoughts and 
dreams and hopes all centered in the sleeping girl, there 
in the lean-to sheltered by his watchful care. But what 
those dreams were, what his visions of the future  who 
shall set forth or fully understand? 



CHAPTER XV 



LABOR AND COMkAOESHIP 



Four days later, having hastened all their preparations and 
worked with untiring energy, they broke camp for the k>ng 
perilous trek in quest of the ruins of a dead and buried 
city. 

It was at daylight that they started from the little shack 
in the edge of the forest. Both were refreshed by a long 
sleep and by a plunge in the curling breakers that now, 
at high tide, were driven up the beach by a stiflF sea-breeze. 

The morning, which must have been toward the end of 
September  Stern had lost accurate count but reckoned the 
day at about the twenty-fifth  dawned clear and bracing, 
with just a tang of winelike exhilaration in the air. Before 
them the beach spread away and away to eastward, beyond 
the line of vision, a broad and yellow road to bid them 
travel on. 

" Come, girl, en marche!" cried the man cheerily, as he 
adjusted Beta's knapsack so that the platted cord should 
not chafe her shoulders, then swung his own across his 
back. And with a buoyant sense of conquest, yet a regret 
at leaving the little camp which, though crude and rough, 
had yet been a home to them for a week, they turned their 
faces to the rising sun and set out on the journey into the 
unexplored. 

Much altered were they now from those days at Hope 
Villa, when they had been able to restore most of the neces 
sities and even some of the refinements of civilization. 
Now the girl's hair hung in two thick braids down over 

261 




262 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

her worn tiger-skin, each braid as big as a strong man's 
wrist, for she lacked any means to do it up; she had not 
so much as a comb, nor could Stern, without a knife, fashion 
one for her. Their sandals himg in tatters. Stem had 
tried to repair them with strips of squirrd-skin clumsily 
hacked out with the sharp clam-shell, but the result was 
crude. 

Long were his hair and beard, untrimmed now, unkempt 
and red. Clad in his ragged fur garment, bare legged and 
bare armed, with the grass-cloth sack slung over his sinewy 
shoulder and the heavy stone-ax in his hand, he looked the 
very image of prehistoric man  as she, too, seemed the 
woman of that distant age. 

But though their outward guise was that of savages far 
cruder than the North American Indian was when Columbus first beheld him, yet in their brains lay all the splendid 
inheritance of a world-civilization. And as the fire-materials in Stern's sack contained, in germ, all the mechanic 
arts, so their joint intelligence presaged everything that 
yet might be. 

They traveled at an easy pace, like voyagers who foresee many hard days of journeying and who are cautious 
not at first to drain their strength. Five hours they walked, 
with now and then a pause. Stem calculated they had 
made twelve miles or more before they camped beside a 
stream that flowing thinly from the wood, sank into the sand 
and was lost before it reached the sea. 

Here they ate and rested till the sun began to pass its 
meridian, when once more they started on their pilgrimage. 
That night, after a day wherein they had met no other sign 
of life than gulls and crows ravaging the mussel-beds, they 
slept on piles of sun-dried kelp which they heaped into some 
crevices under an overhanging brow of low cliflFs on a rocky 
point. And dawn found them again, traveling steadily eastward, battle-axes swinging, hopes high, in perfect comradeship and faith. 

Toward what must have been about ten o'clock of that 




LABOR AND COMRADESHIP 263 

morning they reached the mouth of a river, something like 
half a mile wide where it joined the sea. By following 
this up a mile or so they reached a narrow point; but even 
here, burdened as they were, swimming was out of the 
question. 

" The only thing to do," said Stem, " will be to wait till 
the tide backs up and gives us quiet water, then make our 
way across on a log or two "  a plan they put into eflfect 
with good success. Mid-afternoon, and they were on their 
way again, east-bound. 

" Was that the Connecticut ? " asked Beatrice. " Or do 
you think we've passed that already ? " 

" More likely to be the Thames," he answered.  I figure that what used be New London is less than five miles 
from here." 

"Why not visit the ruins? There might be something 
there." 

" Not enough to bother with. We mustn't be diverted 
from the main issue, Boston ! Forward, march ! " 

Next day Stern descried a point jutting far out to 
sea, which he declared was none other than Watch Hill 
Point, on the Rhode Island boundary. And on the afternoon of the following day they reached what was indisputably Point Judith and Narragansett Bay. 

Here they were forced to turn northward; and when 
camping time came, after they had dug their due allowance 
of clams and gathered their breadfruit and made their fire 
in the edge of the woods, they held conclave about their 
future course. 

The bay was, indeed, a factor neither Stern nor she had 
reckoned on. To follow its detours all the way around 
would add seventy to a hundred miles to their journey, according as they hugged the shore or made straight cuts 
across some of the wooded promontories. 

" And from Providence, at the head of the bay, to Boston, is only forty miles in a direct line northwest-by-north/' 
said he, poking the fire contemplatively. 




264 DARKNESS AND DAWN 



4t 



 
 



But if we miss our way ? " 

How can we, if we follow the remains of the railroad? 
The cuts and embankments will guide us all the way." 

I know ; but the forest is so thick ! " 

Not so thick but we can make at least five miles a day. 
That is, inside of eight days we can reach the Hub. And 
we shall have the help of tools and guns, remember. In a 
place the size of Providence there must be a few ruins still 
containing something of value. Yes, by all means the overland route is best, from now on. It means forty miles 
instead of probably two hundred/' 

Thus they agreed upon it; and, having settled matters, 
gave them no more thought, but prepared for rest. And 
sunset came down once more; it faded, smoldering along 
the forest-line to westward; it burned to dull umbers and 
vague purples, then went out. And " the wind that runs 
after the sun awoke and sang softly among the tree-tops, 
a while, like the intoning of a choir invisible, and was silent 
again." 

There by the firelight he half saw, half sensed her presence, vague and beautiful despite the travel-worn, tattered 
skin that clothed her. He felt her warm, vital nearness ; his 
hand sought hers and pressed it, and the pressure was returned. And with a thrill of overwhelming tenderness he 
realized what this girl was to him and what his love meant 
and what it all portended. 

Until long after dark they sat and talked of the future, 
and of life and death, and of the soul and of the great 
mystery that had swept the earth clean of all of their kind 
and had left them, alone, of all those fifteen hundred million 
human creatures. 

And overhead,  blotting out a patch of sky and stars, 
moved slowly the dark object which had so puzzled Stem 
since the first time he had observed it  the thing he meant 
to know about and solve, once he could reach the Cambridge Observatory. And of this, too, they talked; but 
neither he nor she could solve the riddle of its nature. 



LABOR AND COMRADESHIP 265 

Their talk together, that night, was typical of the relationship that had grown up between them in the long weeks 
since their awakening in the Tower. Almost all, if not quite 
all, the old-time idea of sex had faded  the old, false assumption on the part of the man that he was by his very 
nature the superior of woman. 

Stern and Beatrice now stood on a different footing; their 
friendship, comradeship and love were based on the tacit 
recognition of absolute equality, save for Stem's accidental 
physical superiority. It was as though they had been two 
men, one a little stronger and larger than the other, so far 
as the notion of equality went; though this by no means 
destroyed that magnetic sex-emotion which, in other aspects, 
thrilled and attracted and infused them both. 

Their love never for a moment obscured Stem's recognition of the girl as primarily a human being, his associate on 
even terms in this geat game that they were playing together, this tremendous problem they were laboring to solve 
 the vastest and most vital problem that ever yet had confronted the human race, now represented in its totality by 
these two living creatures. 

And as Beatrice recalled the world of other times, with 
all its false conventions, limitations and pettily stupid gallantries, she shuddered with repulsion. In her heart she 
knew that, had the choice been hers, she would not have 
gone back to that former state of half -chattel patronage, 
half-hypocritical homage and total misconception. 

Contrasting her present state with her past one, and comparing this man  all ragged, unshaven and long-haired as 
he was, yet a true man in every inch of his lithe, virile body 
 with others she remembered, she found up-welling in her 
a love so deep and powerful, grounded on such broad bases 
of respect and gratitude, mutual interest and latent passion, 
that she herself could not yet understand it in all its phases 
and its moods. 

The relation which had grown up between them, comrades and partners in all things, partook of a fine tolerance. 




266 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

an exquisite and never-failing tenderness, a wealth of all 
intimate, yet respectful adoration. It held elements of 
brotherhood and parenthood; it was the love of coworkers 
striving toward a common goal, of companions in life and 
in learning, in striving, doing, accomplishing, even failing. 
Failure mattered nothing; for still the comradeship was 
there. 

And on this soil was growing daily and hourly a love 
such as never since the world began had been equaled in 
purity and power, faith, hope, integrity. It purified all 
things, made easy all things, braved all things, pardoned 
all things ; it was long-suffering and very kind. 

They had no need to speak of it ; it showed in every word 
and look and act, even in the humblest and most commonplace of services each for each. Their love was lived, not 
talked about. 

All their trials and tremendous hardships, their narrow 
passes with death, and their hard-won escapes, the vicissitudes of a savage life in the open, with every imaginable 
difficulty and hard expedient, could not destroy their illusions or do aught than bind them in closer bonds of unity. 

And each realized when the time should ripen for another 
and a more vital love, that, too, would circle them with 
deeper tenderness, binding them in still more intense and 
poignant bonds of joy. 




CHAPTER XVI 

FINDING THE BIPLANE 

t 

The way up the shores of Narragansett Bay was full of 
experiences for them both. Animal life revealed itself far 
more abundantly here than along the open sea 

' Some strange blight or other must lie in the proximity 
of that terrific maelstrom/' judged Stem, " something that 
repels all the larger animals. But skirting this bay, 
there's life and to spare. How many deer have we seen 
to-day? Three? And one bull-buffalo! With any kind 
of a gun, or even a revolver, I could have had them all. 
And that big-muzzled, shaggy old moose we saw drinking 
at the pool, back there, would have been meat for us if we 
had had a rifle. No danger of starving here, Beatrice, once 
we get our hands on something that'll shoot again I ' 

The night they camped on the way, Stem kept constant 
guard by the fire, in case of possible attack by wolves or 
other beasts. He slept only an hour, when the girl insisted 
on taking his place ; but when the sun arose, red and huge 
through the mists upon the bay, he started out again on the 
difficult trail as strong and confident as though he had not 
kept nine hours of vigil. 

Ever)rwhere was change and desolation. As the travelers came into a rion which had at one time been more 
densely populated, they began to find here and there mournful relics of the life that once had been  traces of man, 
dim and all but obliterated, but now and then puissant in 
their revocation of the distant past. 

Twice they found the ruins of villages  a few vague hol
267 



t 




268 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

lows in the earth, where cellars had been, hollows in which 
huge trees were rooted, and where, perhaps, a grass-grown 
crumble of disintegrated brick indicated the one-time presence of a chimney. They discovered several farms, with a 
few stunted apple-trees, the distant descendants of orchard 
growths, struggling against the larger forest strength, and 
with perhaps a dismantled well-curb, a moss-covered fireplace or a few bits of iron that had possibly been a stove, for 
all relics of the other age. Mournful were the long stone 
walls, crumbling down yet still discernible in places  walls 
that had cost the labor of generations of farmers and yet 
now lay useless and forgotten in the universal ruin of the 
world. 

On the afternoon of the fifth day since having left their 
lean-to by the shore of Long Island Sound, they came upon 
a canon which split the hills north of the site of Greenwich, 
a gigantic " fault '' in the rocks, richly striated and stratified with rose and red and umber, a great cleft on the other 
side of which the forest lay somber and repellent in the 
slanting rays of the September sun. 

" By Jove, whatever it was that struck the earth/' said 
Stem, " must have been good and plenty. The whole planet 
seems to be ripped up and broken and shattered. No 
wonder it knocked down New York and killed everybody 
and put an end to civilization. Why, there's ten cubic miles 
of material gouged out right here in sight ; here's a regular 
Panama Canal, or bigger, all scooped out in one piece! 
What the devil could have happened ? " 

There was no answer to the question. After an hour 
spent in studying the formations along the lip of the cleft 
they made a detour eastward to the shore, crossed the 
fjord that ran into the canon, and again kept to the north. 
Soon after this they struck a railroad embankment and this 
they followed now, both because it afforded easier travel 
than the shore, which now had grown rocky and broken, 
and also because it promised to guide them surely to the 
place they sought. 




FINDING THE BIPLANE 269 

It was on the sixth day of their exploration that they at 
last penetrated the ruins of Providence. Here, as in New 
Yoiic, pavements and streets and squares were all grassed 
over and covered with pines and elms and oaks, rooting 
among the stones and shattered brickwork that lay prone 
upon the earth. Only here or there a steel or concrete 
building still defied the ravages of time. 

 The wreckage is even more complete here than on Manhattan Island/' Stern judged as he and the girl stood in 
front of the ruins of the post-office surveying the debris. 
The smaller area, of course, would naturally be covered 
sooner with the inroads of the forest. I doubt whether 
there's enough left in the whole place to be of any real 
service to us/ 

" To-morrow will be time enough to see," answered the 
girl. " It's too late now for any more work to-day." 

They camped that night in an upper story of the Pequot 
National Bank Building on Hampstead Street. Here, having cleared out the bats and spiders, they made themselves 
an aerie secure from attack, and slept long and soundly. 
Dawn found them at work among the overgrown ruins, 
much as  three months before  they had labored in the 
Metropolitan Tower and about it. Less, however, remained 
to salvage here. For the smaller and lighter types of buildings had preserved far less of the relics of civilization than 
had been left in the vast and solid structures of New York. 

In a few places, none the less, they still came upon the 
little piles of the gray ash that marked where men and 
women had fallen and died ; but these occiured only in the 
most sheltered spots. Stem paid no attention to them. His 
energies and his attention were now fixed on the one task 
of getting skins, arms, ammunition and supplies. And before nightfall, by a systematic looting of such shops as remained  perhaps not above ja score in all could even be 
entered  the girl and he had gathered more than enough to 
last them on their way to Boston. One find which pleased 
him immensely was a dozen sealed glass jars of tobacco. 



i 




270 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" As for a pipe," said he, " I can make that easily enough. 
What's more I will ! ' More still, he did, that very evening, and the gloom was redolent again of good smoke. 
Thereafter he slept as not for a long, long time. 

They spent the next day in fashioning new garments and 
sandals ; in putting to rights the two rifles Stem had chosen 
from the basement of the State armory, and in making 
bandoliers to carry their supply of cartridges. The possession of a knife once more, and of steel wherewith reaidily 
to strike fire, delighted the man enormously. The scissors 
they found in a hardware-shop, though rusty, enabled him 
to trim his beard and hair. Beatrice hailed a warped hardrubber comb with joy. 

But the geat discovery still awaited them, the one supreme find which in a moment changed every plan of travel, 
opened the world to them, and at a single stroke increased 
their hopes ten thousandfold  the discovery of the old 
Pauillac monoplane! 

They came upon this machine, pregnant with such vast 
possibilities, in a concrete hangar back of the Federal courthouse on Anderson Street. The building attracted Stem's 
attention by its unusual state of preservation. He burst in 
one of the rusted iron shutters and climbed through the window to see what might be inside. 

A moment later Beatrice heard a cry of astonishment and 
joy. 

' Great Heavens ! " the man exclaimed, appearing at the 
window. " Come in! Come in  see what I've found! " 

And he stretched out his hands to help her up and through 
the aperture. 

" What is it, boy ? More arms ? . More   

"An aeroplane! Good God, think o' that, will you?" 

" An aeroplane? But it's all to pieces, of course, and  " 

" Come on in and look at it, I say ! " Excitedly he lifted 
her through the window. ' See there, will you ? Isn't that 
the eternal limit? And to think I never even thought of 
trying to find one in New York ! " 



 



FINDING THE BIPLANE 271 

He gestured at the dust-laden old machine that, forlorn 
and in sovereign disrepair, stood at the other end of the 
hangar. Together they approached it. 

" If it will work," the man exclaimed thickly; "if it will 
only work  ' 

" But will it? " the girl exclaimed, her eyes lighting with 
the excitement of the find, heart beating fast at thought of 
what it might portend. "Can you put it in shape, boy? 
Or" 

" I don't know. Let me look ! Who knows ? Maybe  ' 

And already he was kneeling, peering at the mechanism, 
feeling the frame, the gear, the stays, with hands that trembled more than ever they had trembled since their great 
adventure had begun. 

As he examined the machine, while Beatrice stood by, 
he talked to himself. 

" Good thing the framework is aluminum," said he, " or 
It wouldn't be worth a tinker's dam after all this time. But 
as it is, it's taken no harm that I can see. Wire braces all 
gone, rusted out and disappeared. Have to be rewired 
throughout, if I can find steel wire; if not, I'll use braided 
leather thongs. Petrol tank and feed pipe O. K. Girder 
boom needs a little attention. Steering and control column 
intact they'll do ! " 

Part by part he handled the machine, his skilled eye 
leaping from detail to detail. 

" Canvas planes all gone, of course. Not a rag left ; 
only the frame. But, no matter, we can remedy thdt. 
Wooden levers, skids, and so on, gone. Easily replaced. 
Main thing is the engine. Looks as though it had been carefully covered, but, of course, the covering has rotted away. 
No matter, we'll soon see. Now, this carbureter  " 

His inspection lasted half an hour, while the girl, lost 
among so many technicalities, sat down on the dusty concrete floor beside the machine and listened in a kind of 
dazed admiration. 

He gave her, finally, his opinion. 



t 




272 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" This machine will go if properly handled/' said he, rising triumphantly and slapping the dust off his palms. '' The 
chassis needs truing up, the equilibrator has sagged out of 
plumb, and the ailerons have got to be readjusted, but it's 
only a matter of a few days at the outside before she'll be 
in shape. 

" The main thing is the engine, and so far as I can judge, 
that's pretty nearly O. K. The magneto may have to be 
gone over, but that's a mere trifle. Odd, I never thought 
of either finding one of these machines in New York, or 
building one ! When I think of all the weary miles we've 
tramped it makes me sick ! " 

" I know," she answered ; " but how about fuel ? And 
another thing  have you ever operated one? G>uld you  " 

" Run one ? " He laughed aloud. " I'm the man who 
first taught Carlton Holmes to fly  you know Holmes, who 
won the Gordon-Craig cup for altitude record in 1916. I 
built the first" 

" I know, dear ; but Holmes was killed at Schenectady, 
you remember, and this machine is different from anything 
you're used to, isn't it ? " Beatrice asked. 

" It won't be when I'm through with it ! I tell you, 
Beatrice, we're going to fly. No more hiking through the 
woods or along beaches for us. From now on we travel 
in the air  and the world opens out to us as though by 
magic. 

" Distance ceases to mean an)rthing. The whole continent is ours. If there's another human creature on it we 
find him! And if there isn't then, perhaps we may find 
some in Asia or in Europe, who knows ? " 

" You mean you'd dare to attack the Atlantic with a 
patched-up machine more than a thousand years old?" 

 I mean that eventually I can and will build one that'll 
take us to Alaska, and so across the fifty-mile gap from 
Cape Prince of Wales to East Cape. The whole world lies 
at our feet, girl, with this new idea, this new possibility 
in mind ! " 




FINDING THE BIPLANE 273 

She smiled at his enthusiasm. 

" But fuel ? " asked she, practical even in her joy. " I 
don't imagine there's any gasoline left now, do you? A 
stuff as volatile as that, after all these centuries? What 
metal could contain it for a thousand years ? ' 

" There's alcohol," he answered. " A raid on the ruins 
of a few saloons and drug-stores will give me all I need to 
carry me to Boston, where there's plenty, never fear. A 
few slight adjustments of the engine will fit it for burning 
alcohol. And as for the planes, good stout buckskin, well 
sewn together and stretched on the frames, will do the 
trick as well as canvas  better, maybe." 

" But" 

" Oh, what a little pessimist it is to-day ! " he interrupted. 
" Always coming at me with objections, eh? " He took her 
in his arms and kissed her. ' I tell you Beta, this is no 
pipe-dream at all, or anything like it ; the thing's reality  
we're going to fly ! But it'll mean the most tremendous lot 
of sewing and stitching for you ! " 

" You're a dear ! " she answered inconsequentially.  I 
do believe if the whole world fell apart you could put it 
together again." 

"With your help, yes," said he. "What's more, I'm 
going to  and a better world at that than ever yet was 
dreamed of. Wait and see I " 

Laughing, he released her. 

" Well, now, we'll go to work," he concluded. " Nothing's accomplished by mere words. Just lay hold of that 
lateral there, will you? And we'll haul this old machine 
out where we can have a real good look at her, what do 
you say? Now, then, one, two, three  " 



t 




CHAPTER XVII 

ALL ABOARD FOR BOSTON 1 

Nineteen days from the discovery of the biplane, a singular happening for a desolate world took place on the broad 
beach that now edged the city where once the sluggish Providence River had flowed seaward. 

For here, clad in a double suit of leather that Beatrice 
had made for him, Allan Stern was preparing to give the 
rehabilitated Pauillac a try-out. 

Day by day, working incessantly when not occupied in 
hunting or fishing, the man had rebuilt and overhauled the 
entire mechanism. Tools he had found a-plenty in the 
ruins, tools which he had ground and readjusted with consummate care and skill. Alcohol he had gathered together 
from a score of sources. All the wooden parts, such as 
skids and levers and propellers, long since vanished and 
gone, he had cleverly rebuilt. 

And now the machine, its planes and rudders covered 
with strongly sewn buckskin, stretched as tight as drum 
heads, its polished screw of the Chauviere type gleaming in 
the morning sun, stood waiting on the sands, while Stem 
gave it a painstaking inspection. 

" I think," he judged, as he tested the last stay and gave 
the engine its final adjustment. ' I think, upon my word, 
this machine's better to-day than when she was first built. 
If Tm not mistaken, buckskin's a better material for planes 
than ever canvas was  it's far stronger and less porous, 
for one thing  and as for the stays, I prefer the braided 
hide. Wire's so liable to snap. 

274 




ALL ABOARD FOR BOSTON ! 275 

"This compass IVe rigged on gimbals here, beats anything Pauillac himself ever had. What's the matter with 
my home-made gyrostat and anemometer ? And hasn't this 
aneroid barometer got cards and spades over the old-style 
models ? " 

Enthusiastic as a boy, Stern shook his head and smiled 
delightedly at Beatrice as he expounded the merits of the 
biplane and its fittings. She, half glad, half anxious at the 
possible outcome of the venture, stood by and listened and 
nodded as though she understood all the minutiae he. explained. 

" So then, you're ready to go up this morning? " she 
asked, with just a quiver of nervousness in her voice. 
" You're quite certain everything's all right  no chance of 
accident? For if anything happened  " 

" There, there, nothing can happen, nothing will ! " he 
reassured her. " This motor's been run three hours in 
succession already without skipping an explosion. Everything's in absolute order, I tell you. And as for the human, 
personal equation, I can vouch for that myself ! " 

Stem walked around to the back of the machine, picked 
up a long, stout stake he had prepared, took his ax, and at 
a distance of about twelve feet behind the biplane drove 
the stake very deep into the hard sand. 

He knotted a strong leather cord to the stake, brought it 
forward and secured it to the frame of the machine. 

" Now, Beatrice," he directed, " when I'm ready you cut 
the cord. I haven't any corps of assistants to hold me back 
till the right moment and then give me a shove, so the best I 
can do is this. Give a quick slash right here when I shout. 
And whatever happens don't be alarmed. I'll come back to 
you safe and sound, never fear. And this afternoon it's 
 All Aboard for Boston ! ' " 

Smiling and confident, he cranked the motor. It caught, 
and now a chattering tumult filled the air, rising, falling, 
as Stem manipulated throttle and spark to test them once 
again. 



/ 




276 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Into the driver's seat he climbed, strapped himself in and 
turned to smile at Beatrice. 

Then with a practised hand he threw the lever operating 
the friction-clutch on the propeller-shaft. And now the 
greaf blades began to twirl, faster, faster, till they twinkled 
and buzzed in the sunlight with a htun like that of a gigantic 
electric fan. 

The machine, yielding to the urge, tugged forward, straining at its bonds like a whippet eager for a race. Beatrice, 
her face flushed with excitement, stood ready with the 
knife. 

Louder, faster whirled the blades, making a shiny blur; 
a breeze sprang out behind them ; it became a wind, blowing the girl's hair back from her beautiful face. 

Stem settled himself more firmly into the seat and gripped 
the wheel. 

The engine was roaring like a battery of Northrup looms. 
Stern felt the pull, the power, the life of the machine. And 
his heart leaped within him at his victory over the dead 
past, his triumph still to be! 

"All right!" he cried. "Let go--4et go!" 

The knife fell. The parted rope jerked back, writhing, 
like a wounded serpent. 

Gently at first, then with greater and greater speed, shaking and bouncing a little on the broad, flat wheels that Stem 
had fitted to the alighting gear, the plane rolled off along 
the firm-beaten sands. 

Stern advanced the spark and now the screw sang a 
louder, higher threnody. With ever-accelerating velocity the 
machine tooled forward down the long stretch, while Beatrice stood gazing after it in rapt attention. 

Then all at once, when it had sped some three hundred 
feet, Stern rotated the rising plane; and suddenly the machine lifted. In a long smooth curve, she slid away up 
the air as though it had been a solid hill  up, up, upswifter and swifter now, till a suddenly accelerated rush 



ALL ABOARD FOR BOSTON I 27 

cleared the altitude of the tallest pines in the forest edging 
the beach, and Stem knew his dream was true ! 

With a great shout of joy, he leaped the plane aloft I Its 
rise had all the exhilarating suddenness of a seagull Ringing 
up from the foam-streaked surface of the breakers. And 
in that moment Stern felt the bliss of conquest. 

Behind him, the spruce propellers were makii a misty 
haze of humming energy. In front, the engine spat and 
clattered. The vast spread of the leather wings, sewn, 
stretched and tested, crackled and boomed as the wind got 
under them and heaved them skyward. 

Stem shouted again. The machine, he felt, was a thing 
of life, friendly and tme. Not since that time in the 
tower, months ago, when he had repaired the big steamengine and actually made it run, had he enjoyed so real a 
sense of mastery over the world as now ; had he sensed so 
definite a connection with the mechanical powers of the 
world that was, the world that still should be. 

No longer now was he fighting the forces of nature, all 
barehanded and alone. Now back of him lay the energy 
of a machine, a metal heart, throbbing and inexhaustible 
and full of life! Now he had tapped the vein of Power! 
And in his ears the ripping volley of the exhaust sounded 
as sweetly as might the voice of a long-absent and beloved 
girl returning to her sweetheart. 

For a moment he felt a choking in his throat, a mist before his eyes. This triumph stirred him emotionally, practical and cool and keen though he was. His hand trembled 
a second ; his heart leaped, throbbing like the motor itself. 

But almost immediately he was himself once more. The 
weakness passed. And with a sweep of his clear eyes, he 
saw the speeding landscape, woods, hills, streams, that now 
were mnning there beneath him like a fluid map. 

"My God, it's grand, though!" he exclaimed, swerving 
the plane in a long, ascending spiral. All the art, the knack 
of flight came back to him, at the touch of the wheel, as 



f 




278 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

readily as swimming to an expert in the water. Fear? 
The thought no more occurred to him than to you, reading 
these words. 

Higher he mounted, higher still, his hair whipping out 
behind in the wild wind, till he could see the sparkle of 
Narragsett .Bay, there in the distance where the river 
broadened into it. At him the wind tore, louder even 
than the spitting crackle of the motor. He only laughed, 
and soared again. 

But now he thought of Beatrice ; and, as he banked and 
came about, he peered far down for sight of her. 

Yes, there she stood, a tiny dot upon thfi distant sand. 
And though he knew she could not hear, in sheer animal 
spirits and overwhelming joy he shouted once again, a 
wild, mad triumphant hurrah that lost itself in empty 
space. 

The test he gave the Pauillac convinced him she would 
carry all the load they would need put upon her, and more. 
He climbed, swooped, spiraled, volplaned, and rose again, 
executing a series of evolutions that would have won him 
fame at any aero meet. And when, after half an hour's 
exhaustive trial, he swooped down toward the beach again, 
he found the plane alighted as easily as she had risen. 

Like a sea-bird sinking with flat, outstretched wings, 
coming to rest with perfect ease and beauty on the surface 
of the deep, the Pauillac slid down the long hill of air. 
Stern cut off power. The machine took the sand with no 
more than vigorous bound, and, running forward perhaps 
fifty yards, came to a stand. 

Stern had no sooner leaped from the seat than Beatrice 
was with him. 

" Oh, glorious!" she cried, her face alight with joy and 
fine enthusiasm. All her spontaneity, her love and admiration were aroused. And she kissed him with so frank and 
glad a love that Stem felt his heart jump wildly. He 
thought she never yet had been so beautiful. 

But all he said was: 



ALL ABOARD FOR BOSTON! 279 

" Couldn't run finer, little girl ! Barring a little stiffness 
here and there, she's perfect. So, then, when do we start, 
eh ? To-morrow morning, early ? " 

"Why not this afternoon? I'm sure we can get ready 
by then." 

" Afternoon it is, if you say so ! But weVe got to work, 
to do it!" 

By noon they had gathered together all the freight they 
meant to carry, and  though the sun had dimmed behind 
dull clouds of a peculiar slaty gray, that drifted in from eastward  had prepared for the flight to Boston. After a plentiful dinner of venison, berries and breadfruit, they loaded 
the machine. 

Stem calculated that, with Beatrice as a passenger, he 
could carry seventy-five or eighty poimds of freight. The 
two rifles, ammtmition, knives, ax, tools and provisions 
they packed into the skin sack Beatrice had prepared, 
weighed no more than sixty. Thus Stern reckoned there 
would be a fair " coefficient of safety " and more than 
enough power to carry them with safety and speed. 

It was at I :is that the girl took her place in the passenger's seat and let Stem strap her in. 

" Your first flight, little girl ? " he asked smiling, yet a 
trifle grave. The barking motor almost drowned his voice. 

She nodded but did not speak. He noted the pulse in 
her throat, a little quick, yet firm. 

" You're positive you're not going to be afraid ? " 

 How could I, with you ? " 

He made all secure, climbed up beside her, and strapped 
himself in his seat. 

Then he threw in the clutch and released the brake. 

"Hold fast!" cried he. "AU aboard for Boston! 
Hold fast!" 




CHAPTER XVIII 

THE HURRICANE 

Soaring strongly even under the additional weight, humming with the rush of air, the plane made the last turn of 
her spiral and straightened out at the height of twelve 
hundred feet for her long northward run across the unbroken wilderness. 

Stern preferred to fly a bit high, believing the air-currents more dependable there. Even as he rose above the 
forest-level, his experienced eye saw possible trouble in the 
wind-clouds banked to eastward and in the fall of the 
barometer. But with the thought, " At this rate we'll make 
Boston in three-quarters of an hour at the outside, and the 
storm can't strike so soon," he pushed the motor to still 
greater speed and settled to the urgent business of steering 
a straight course for Massachusetts Bay. 

Only once did he dare turn aside his eyes even so much 
as to glance at Beatrice. She, magnificently unafraid on 
the quivering back of this huge airdragon, showed the 
splendid excitement of the moment by the sparkle of her 
glance, the rush of eloquent blood to her cheeks. 

Stern's achievement, typical of the invincible conquest of 
the human soul over matter, time and space, thrilled her 
with unspeakable pride. And as she breathed for the 
first time the pure, thin air of those upper regions, her 
strong heart leaped within her breast, and she knew that 
this man was worthy of her most profound, indissoluble 
love. 

Far down beneath them now the forest sped away to 

280 




THE HURRICANE 281 

southward. The gleam of the river, dulled by the sunless 
sky, showed here and there through the woods, which 
spread their unbroken carpet to the horizon, impenetrable 
and filled with nameless perils. At thought of how he 
was cheating them all, Stem smiled to himself with grim 
satisfaction. 

" Good old engine ! " he was thinking, as he let her out 
another notch. " Some day FU put you in a boat, and 
we'll go cruising. With you, there's no limit to the possibilities. The world is really ours now, with your help ! " 

Behind them now lay the debris of Pawtucket. Stem 
caught a glimpse of a mined building, a cmmpled-in gastank with an elm growing up through the stark ribs of it, a 
jumble of wreckage, all small and toylike, there below; then 
the plane swooped onward, and all lay deep buried in the 
wilderness again. 

" A few minutes now," he said to himself, " and we'll be 
across what used to be the line, and be spinning over 
Massachusetts. This certainly beats walking all hollow! 
Whew!" as the machine lurched forward and took an 
ugly drop. He jerked the rising-plane lever savagely. 
" Still the same kind of unreliable air, I see, that we used 
to have a thousand years ago ! " 

For a few minutes the biplane hummed on and on in long 
rising and falling slants, like a swallow skimming the surface 
of a lake. The even staccato of the exhaust, echoless in 
that height and vacancy, rippled with cadences like a monster mowing-machine. And Stern was banning to consider himself as good as in Boston already  was beginning 
to wonder where the best place might be to land, whether 
along the shore or on the Common, where, perhaps, some 
open space still remained  when another formidable airpocket dropped him with sickening speed. 

He righted the plane with a wrench that madt her creak 
and tremble. 

" I've got to take a higher level, or a lower,' he thou|t. 
" Something's wrong here, that's certain! " 




282 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

But as he shot the biplane sharply upward, hoping to 
find a calmer lane, a glance at the sky showed trouble 
impending. 

Over the gray background of wind-clouds, a fine-shredded 
drive was beginning to scud. The whole east had grown 
black. Only far off to westward did a little patch of dull 
blue show; and even this was closing up with singular 
rapidity. And, though the motion of the machine made 
this hard to estimate, Stern thought to see by the lateral 
drift of the country below, that they were being carried 
westward by what  to judge from the agitation of the 
tree-tops far below  must already be a considerable gale. 

For a moment the engineer cursed his foolhardiness in 
having started in face of such a storm as now every moment threatened to break upon them. 

" I should have known," he told himself, " that it was 
suicidal to attempt a flight when every indication showed 
a high wind coming. My infernal impatience, as usual! 
We should have stayed safe in Providence and let this blow 
itself out, before starting. But now  well, it's too late." 

But was it ? Had he not time enough left to make a wide 
sweep and circle back whence he had come? He glanced 
at the girl. If she showed fear he would return. But on 
her face he saw no signs of aught but confidence and joy 
and courage. And at sight of her, his own resolution 
strengthened once again. 

" Why retreat ? " he pondered, holding the machine to 
her long soaring rise. " We must have made a good third 
of the distance already  perhaps a half. In ten or fifteen 
minutes more we ought to sight the blue of the big bay. 
No use in turning back now. And as for alighting and 
letting the storm blow over, that's impossible. Among these 
forests it would mean only total wreckage. Even if we 
could land, we never could start again. No; the only 
thing to do is to hold her to it and plow through, storm or 
no storm. I guess the good old Pauillac can stand the 
racket, right enough!" 




THE HURRICANE .283 

Thus for a few moments longer he held the plane with 
her nose to the northeast-by-north, his compass giving him 
direction, while far, far below, the world slid back and 
away in a vast green carpet of swaying trees that stretched 
to the dim, dmi horizon. 

Stem could never afterward recall exactly how or when 
the hurricane struck them. So stunning was the blow that 
hurled itself, shrieking, in a tumult of mad cross-currents, 
air maelstroms and frenzied whirls, all across the sky; so 
overpowering the chill tempest that burst from those inky 
clouds; so sudden the darkness that fell, the slinging hail 
volleys that lashed and pelted them, that any clear perception of their plight became impossible. 

All the man knew was that direction and control had 
been knocked clean from his hands; that the world had 
suddenly vanished in a black drive of cloud and hail and 
wild-whipping vapor; that he no longer knew north frcwn 
south, or east from west ; but that  struggling now even to 
breathe, filled with sick fears for the safety of the girl 
beside him  he was fighting, wrenching, wrestling with 
the motor and the planes and rudders, to keep the machine 
from up-ending, from turning turtle in mid-air, from 
sticking her nose under an air-layer and swooping, hurtling 
over and over, down, down, like a shattered rocket, to 
dash herself to pieces on the waiting earth below. 

The first furious onset showed the engineer he could not 
hope to head up into that cyclone and live. He swung 
with it, therefore; and now, driving across the sky like a 
filament of cloud-wrack, rode on the crest of the great 
storm, his motor screaming its defiance at the shrieking 
wind. 

Did Beatrice shout out to him ? Did she try to make him 
hear? He could not tell. No human voice could have 
been audible in such a turmoil. Stern had no time to think 
even of her at such a moment of deadly peril. 

As a driver with a runaway stallion jerks and saws and 
strains upon the leather to regain control, so now the man 



I 




284 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

wrestled with his storm-buffeted machine. A less expert 
aeronaut must have gone down to death in that mad nexus 
of conflicting currents ; but Stem was cool and full of craft 
and science. Against the blows of the huge tempest he 
pitted his own skill, the strength of the stout mechanism, 
the trained instincts of the bom mechanician. 

And, storm-driven, the biplane hurtled westward, ever 
westward, through the gloom. Nor could its two passengers by any sight or sound detemiine what speed they traveled at, whither they went, what lay behind, or what ahead. 

Concepts of time, too, vanished. Did it last one hour 
or three? Five hours, or even more? Who could tell? 
Lacking any point of contact with reality, merged and 
whelmed in that stupendous chill nightmare, all wrought 
of savage gale, rain, hail-blasts, cloud and scudding vapor, 
they sensed nothing but the fight for life itself, the stmggle 
to keep aloft till the cyclone should have blown itself out, 
and they could seek the shelter of the earth once more. 

Reality came back with a reft in the jetty sky, the faint 
shine of a little pale blue there, and  a while later  a 
glimpse of water, or what seemed to be such, very far 
below. 

More steady now the currents grew. Stern volplaned 
again; and as the machine slid down toward earth, came 
into a calmer and more peaceful stratum. 

Down, down through clouds that shifted, shredded and 
reassembled, he let the plane coast, now under control once 
more; and all at once there feelow him, less than three 
thousand feet beneath, he saw, dim and vague as though 
in the light of evening, a vast sheet of water that stretched 
away, away, till the sight lost it in a bank of low-hung 
vapors on the horizon. 

" The seaf " thought Stem, with sudden terror. Who 
could tell? Perhaps the storm, westbound, had veered; 
perhaps it might have carried them off the Atlantic coast I 
This might be the ocean, a hundred or two hundred miles 
from land. And if so, then good-by! 




THE HURRICANE 285 

Checking the descent, he drove forward on level wings, 
peering below with wide eyes, while far above him the 
remnants of the storm fled, routed, and let a shaft of pallid 
sunlight through. 

Stem's eye caught the light of that setting beam, which 
still reached that height, though all below, on earth, was 
dusk ; and now he knew the west again and found his sense 
of direction. 

The wind, he perceived, still blew to westward; and 
with a thrill of relief he felt, as though by intuition, that 
its course had not varied enough to drive him out to sea. 

Though he knew the ripping clatter of the engine 
drowned his voice, he shouted to the grl : 

" Don't be alarmed ! Only a lake down there ! " and 
with fresh courage gave the motor all that she would stand. 

A lake ! But what lake ? What sheet of water, of this 
size, lay in New England? And if not in New England, 
then where were they? 

A lake ? One of the Great Lakes ? Could that be? Could 
they have been driven clear across Massachusetts, its whole 
length, and over New York State, four hundred miles or 
more from the sea, and now be speeding over Erie or Ontario? 

Stem shuddered at the thought. Almost as well be lost 
over the sea as over any one of these tremendous bodies 1 
Were not the land near, nothing but death now faced them; 
for already the fuel-gage showed but a scant two gallons, 
and who could say how long the way might be to shore ? 

For a moment the engineer lost heart, but only for a 
moment. 

His eye, sweeping the distance, caught sight of a long, 
dull, dark line on the horizon. 

A cloud-bank, was it? Land, was it? He could not tell. 

" ril chance it, anyhow," thought he, " for it's our only 
hope now. Wlien I don't know where I am, one direction's 
as good as any other. We've got no other chance but that ! 
Here goes!" 




286 



DARKNESS AND DAWN 



Skilfully banking, he hauled the plane about, and settled 
on a long, swift slant toward the dark line. 

"If only the alcohol holds out, and nothing breaks!" 
his thought was. "// only thafs the shore, and we can 
reach it in time J" 




CHAPTER XIX 

WESTWARD HOl 

Fate meant that they should live, those two lone wanderers 
on the face of the great desolation ; and, though night had 
gathered now and all was cloaked in gloom, they landed 
with no worse than a hard shake-up on a level strip of 
beach that edged the confines of the unknown lake. 

Exhausted by the strain and the long fight with death, 
chilled by that sojourn in the upper air, drenched and stiffened and half dead, they had no strength to make a camp. 

The most that they could do was drag themselves down 
to the water's edge and  finding the water fresh, not salt  
drink deeply from hollowed palms. Then, too worn-out 
even to eat, they crawled under the shelter of the biplane's 
ample wings, and dropped instantly into the long and dreamless sleep of utter weariness. 

Mid-morning found them, still lame and stiff but rested, 
cooking breakfast over a cheery fire on the beach near the 
machine. Save for here and there a tree that had blown 
down in the forest, some dead branches scattered on the 
sands, and a few washed-out places where the torrent of 
yesterday's rain had gullied the earth, nature once more 
seemed fair and calm. 

The full force of the terrific wind-storm had probably 
passed to northward; this land where they now found 
themselves  whatever it might be  had doubtless borne 
only a small part of the attack. But even so, and even 
through the sky gleamed clear and blue and sunlit once 
again. Stern and the girl knew the hurricane had been no 
ordinary tempest. 

287 



I 




288 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" It must have been a cyclone, nothing less," judged the 
engineer, as he finished his meal and reached for his comforting pipe. "And God knows where it's driven us to! 
So far as judging distances goes, in a hurricane like that 
it's impossible. This may be any one of the Great Lakes ; 
and, again, it may not. For all we know, we may be up in 
the Hudson Bay region somewhere. This may be Winnipeg, Athabasca, or Great Slave. With the kind of storms 
that happen nowadays, anything's possible." 

" Nothing matters, after all," the girl assured him, " except that we're alive and unhurt; and the machine can still 
travel, for  " 

" Travel ! " cried Stern. " With about a quart of fuel 
or less ! How far, Fd like to know ? " 

" That's so ; I never thought of that ! " the girl replied, 
dismayed. " Oh, dear, what shall we do now ? " 

Stern laughed. 

' Hunt for a town, of course," he reassured her. " There, 
there, don't worry! If we find alcohol, we're all right, 
anyhow. If not, we're better off than we were after the 
maelstrom almost got us, at any rate. Then we had no 
arms, ammunition, tools, or means to make fire, while now 
we've got them all. Forgive my speaking as I did, little 
girl. Don't worry  everything will come right in the end." 

Reassured, she sat before the fire, and for an hour or 
more they drew maps and diagrams in the sand, made 
plans, and laid out their next step in this long campaign 
against the savage power of a deserted world. 

At last, their minds made up, they wheeled the plane 
back to the forest, where Stern cut out among the trees a 
space for its protection. And, leaving it here, covered 
with branches of the thick-topped fern-tree, they took provisions and once more set out on their exploration. 

But this time they had an ax and their two rifles, and 
as they strode northward along the shore they felt a match 
for any peril. 

An hour's walk brought them to the ruins of a steel rec



WESTWARDHO! 389 

reation-pier, with numerous traces of a town along the 
lake behind it. 

"That settles the Hudson Bay theory/ Stem rejoiced, 
as they wandered among the debris. "This is certainly 
one of the Great Lakes, though which one, of course, we 
can't tell as yet. And now if we can round up some aloDhol 
we'll be on our way before very long." 

They found no alcohol, for the only ruin where drugs 
or liquors had evidently been sold had caved in, a mass 
of shattered brickwork, smashing every bottle in the place. 
Stem found many splintered shards of glass ; but that was 
all, so far as fuel was concerned. He discovered something 
else, however, that proved of tremendous value  the wreck 
of a printing-office. 

Presses and iron of all kind had gone to pieces, but some 
of the larger lead types and quads still were recognizable. 
And, the crucial thing, he turned up a jagged bit of stereotype-sheet from under the protection of a concrete plinth 
that had fallen into the cellar. 

All corroded and discolored though it was, he still could 
make out a few letters. 

" A newspaper head, so help me ! " he exclauned, as 
with a trembling finger he pointed the letters out to Beatrice : " Here's an ' H '  here's  mbur '  here's ' aily,' 
and ' ronicl '! Eh, what? ' Chronicle/ it must have been! 
By Jove, you're right ! And the whole thing used to spell 
'Hamburg Daily Chronicle,' or I'm a liar!" 

He thought a moment  thought hard  then burst out: 

"Hamburg, eh? Hamburg, by a big lake? Well, the 
only Hamburg by a lake that I know of used to be Hamburg, New York. I ought to remember. I drew the plans 
for the New York Central bridge, just north of here, over 
the Spring Creek ravine. 

" Yes, sir, this certainly is Hamburg, New York. And 
this lake must be Eric. Now, if I'm correct, ju..b(ck 
up there on that hill we'll find the remains of the railwliy 
cut, and less than ten miles north of here lies all that' 



f 




290 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

left of Buffalo. Some luck, eh? Cast away, cmly fifteen 
miles or so from a place like that. And we might have 
gone to Great Bear Lake, or to  h-m !  to any other place, 
for all the cyclone cared. 

" Well, come on now, let's see if the railway cut is still 
there, and my old bridge; and if so, it's Buffalo for ours! " 

It was all as he had said. The right-of-way of the railroad still showed distinctly, in spite of the fact that ties and 
rails had long since vanished. Of the bridge nothing was 
left but some rusted steel stringers lying entangled about 
the disintegrated concrete piers. But Stem viewed them 
with a melancholy pride and interest  his own handiwork 
in the very long ago. 

They had no time, however, for retrospection; but, once 
more taking the shore, kept steadily northward. And 
before noon they reached the debris of Buffalo, stark and 
deserted by the lake where once its busy commerce and 
its noisy life had thronged. By four o'clock that afternoon 
they had collected fuel enough for the plane to do that 
distance on, and more. Late that night they were again 
back at the spot where they had landed the night before. 

And here, in high spirits and with every hope of better 
fortune now to follow evil, they cooked their meal and spent 
an hour in planning their next move, then slept the sleep 
of well-earned rest. 

They had now decided to abandon the idea of visiting 
Boston. This seeming change of front was not without its 
good reasons. 

"We're half-way to Chicago as it is," Stern summed 
up next morning. "Conditions are probably similar all 
along the Atlantic coast ; there's no life to be found there. 
On the other hand, if we strike for the West there's at 
least a chance of running across survivors. If we don't 
find them there, then we probably sha'n't find them anywhere. In Chicago we can live and restock for further 
explorations, and as for locating a telescope, the Univer


WESTWARD HOf 291 

sity of Chicago ruins are as promising as those of Harvard. 
ChicagOy by all means ! " 

They set out at nine o'clock, and, having made a good 
start, reached Buffalo by twenty minutes past, flying easily 
along the shore at not more than five htmdred feet elevation. 

Gaily the lake sparkled and wimpled in the morning sun, 
unvexed now by any steamer's prow, unshaded by any 
smoke from cities or roaring mills along its banks. 

Despite the lateness of the season, the morning was 
warm ; a mild breeze swayed the treetops and set the little 
whitecaps foaming here and there over the broad expanse 
of blue. Beatrice and Stem felt the joy of life reborn in 
them at that sight. 

" Magnificent ! " cried the engineer. " Now for a swing 
up past Niagara, and we're off ! " 

The river, they found as the plane swept onward, had 
dwindled to a brook that they could almost leap across. 
The rapids now were but a dreary waste of blackened rocks, 
and the Falls themselves, dry save for a desolate trickle 
down past Goat Island, presented a spectacle of death  the 
death of the world as Beatrice and Stem had known it, 
which depressed them both. 

That this tremendous cataract could vanish thus; that 
the gorge and the great Falls which for uncounted centuries 
had thundered to the rush and tumult of the mighty waters 
could now lie mute and dry and lifeless, saddened them 
both beyond measure. 

And they were glad when, with a wide sweep of her 
wings, the Pauillac veered to westward again along the 
north shore of Lake Erie and settled into the long mn of 
close on two hundred and fifty miles to Detroit, where 
Stem counted on making his first stop. 

Without mishap, yet without sighting a single indication of the presence of man, they coasted down the shore 
and ate their dinner on the banks of Lake Saint Clair, 
near the ruins of Windsor, with those of Detroit on the 



9 




it 
it 



292 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

opposite side. For some reason or other, impossible to 
solve, the current now ran northward toward Huron, instead of south to Erie. But this phenomenon they could 
do little more than merely note, for time lacked to give 
it any serious study. 

Mid-afternoon found them getting under way again westbound. 

" Chicago next," said Stem, making some slight but 
necessary adjustment of the air-feed in the carbureter. 

And here's hoping there'll be some natives to greet us ! " 
Amen to that I " answered the girl. " If any life has 
survived at all, it ought to be on the great central plain of 
the country, say from Indiana out through Nebraska. But 
do you know, Allan, if it should come right down to meeting any of our own kind of people  savages, of course, I 
mean, but white  I really believe I'd be awfully afraid of 
them. Imagine white savages dressed in skinsr  " 

" Like us 1 " interrupted Stern, laughing. 

" And painted with woad, whatever woad is ; I remember 
reading about it in the histories of England; all the early 
Britons used it. And carrying nice, knobby stone cleeks to 
stave in our heads ! It would be nice to meet a hundred or 
a thousand of them, eh? Rather a different matter from 
dealing with a horde of those anthr(x>id creatures, I 
imagine." 

Stern only smiled, then answered: 

" Well, I'll take my chances with 'em. Better a fight, say 
I, with my own kind, than solitude like this  you and I 
all alone, girl, getting old some time and dying with never 
a hand-clasp save perhaps such as it may please fate to 
give us from whatever children are to be. But come, come, 
girl. No time for gloomy speculations of trouble. In you 
get now, and off we go  westward bound again." 

Only half an hour out of Detroit it was that they first 
became aware of some strange disturbance of the horizon, 
some inexplicable appearance such as neither of them h?id 
ever seen, a phenomenon so peculiar that, though both 




WESTWARD HO! 3 

cserved it at about the same time, neither Stern could 
believe his own senses nor Beatrice hers. 

For all at once it seemed to them the sky-line was drawing suddenly nearer; it seemed that the horizon was approaching at high speed. 

The dark, untrodden forest mass still stretched away, 
away, until it vanished against the dim blue of the sky; 
but now, instead of that meeting-line being forty miles off, 
it seemed no farther than twenty, and minute by minute it 
indubitably was rushing toward them with a speed equal 
to their own. 

Stem, puzzled and alarmed at this unusual sight, felt 
an impulse to slow, to swerve, to test the apparition in 
some way; but second thought convinced him it must be 
deception of some sort. 

Some peculiar state of the atmosphere," thought he, 

or perhaps we're approaching a high ridge, on the other 
side of which lie clouds that cut away the farther view. 
Or else  no, hang it ! the world seems to end right, there, 
with no clouds to veil it  nothing, only  what ? " 

He saw the girl pointing in alarm. She, too, was clearly 
stirred by the appearance. 

What to do? Stern felt indecision for the first timi 
since he had started on this long, adventurous journey. 
Shut off and descend? Impossible among those forests. 
Swing about and return? Not to be thought of. Keep on 
and meet perils perhaps undreamed of ? Yes  at all hazards 
he would keep on. 

And with a tightening of the jaw he drove the Pauillac 
onward, ever onward  toward the empty space that }rawned 
ahead. 

" End o' the world ? " thought he. " All right, the old 
machine is good for it, and so are we. Here goes ! " 






f 




CHAPTER XX 

ON THE LIP OF THE CHASM 

Very near, now, was the strange apparition. On, on, swift 
as a falcon, the plane hurtled. Stem glanced at Beatrice. 
Never had he seen her more beautiful. About her face, 
rosy and full of life, the luxuriant loose hair was whipping. 
Her eyes sparkled with this new excitement, and on her 
full red lips a smile betrayed her keen enjoyment. No 
trace of fear was there  nothing but confidence and 
strength and joy in the adventure. 

The phenomenon of the world's end  for nothing else 
describes it adequately  now appeared distinctly as a jagged 
line, beyond which nothing showed. It diflFered from the 
horizon line, inasmuch as it was close at hand. Already 
the adventurers could peer down upon it at an acute angle. 

Plainly could they see the outlines of trees growing along 
the verge. But beyond them, nothing. 

It differed essentially from a canon, because there was 
no other side at all. Strain his eye as he might. Stem 
could detect no opposite wall. And now, realizing scmiething of the possibilities of such a chasm, he swung the 
Pauillac southward. Flying parallel to the edge of this 
tremendous barrier, he sought to solve the mystery of its 
true nature. 

 If I go higher, perhaps I may be able to get some 
notion of it," thought he, and swinging up-wind, he spiraled 
till the barometer showed he had gained another thousand 
feet. 

But even this additional view profited him nothing. Half 

294 




ON THE LIP OF THE CHASM 295 

a mile to westward the ragged tree-line still showed as 
before, with vacancy behind it, and as far as Stem could 
see to north, to south, it stretched away till the dim blue 
of distance swallowed it. Yet, straight across the gulf, no 
land appeared. Only the sky itself was visible there, as 
calm and as unbroken as in the zenith, yet extending far 
below where the horizon-line should have been  down, in 
fact, to where the tree-line cut it off from Stern's vision. 

The effect was precisely that of coming to the edge of 
a vast plain, beyond which nothing lay, save space, and 
peering over. 

" The end of the world, indeed ! " thought the engineer, 
despite himself. " But what can it mean? What can have 
happened to the sphere to have changed it like this? Good 
Heavens, what a marvel  what a catastrophe ! " 

Determined at all hazards to know more of this titanic 
break or " fault/' or whatsoever it might be, he banked 
again, and now, on a descending slant, veered down toward 
the lip of the chasm. 

"Going out over it?" cried Beatrice. 

He nodded. 

"It may be miles deep ! " 

" You can't get killed any deader falling a hundred miles 
than you can a hundred feet ! " he shouted back, above the 
droning racket of the motor. 

And with a fresh grip on the wheel, head well forward, 
every sense alert and keen to meet whatever conditions 
might arise, to battle with cross-currents, "air-holes," or 
any other vortices swirling up out of those unknown depths, 
he skimmed the Pauillac fair toward the lip of the monstrous vacancy. 

Now as they rushed almost above the verge he could see 
conclusively they were not dealing here with a caikm like the 
Yosemite or like any other he had ever seen or heard of in 
the old days. 

There was positively no bottom to the terrific thing! 

Just a sheer edge and beyond that  nothing. 



f 




296 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Nowhere any sign of an opposite bank; nowhere the 
faintest trace of land. Far, far below, even a few faint 
clouds showed floating there as if in mid-heaven. 

The effect was ghastly, unnerving and altogether terrible. 
Not that Stem feared height. No, it was the unreality 
of the experience, the inexplicable character of this yawning edge of the world that almost overcame him. 

Only by a strong exercise of will-power could he hold 
the biplane to her course. His every instinct was to veer, 
to retreat back to solid earth, and land somewhere, and once 
more, at all hazards, get the contact of reality. 

But Stern resisted all these impulses, and now already 
had driven the Pauillac right to the lip of the vast nothingness. 

Now they were over! 

" My God I " he cried, stunned by the realization of this 
thing. " Sheer space ! No bottom anywhere ! " 

For all at once they had shot, as it were, out into a void 
which seemed to hold no connection at all with the earth 
they now were quitting. 

Stem caught a glimpse of the tall forest growing up to 
within a hundred yards of the edge, then of smaller trees, 
dwindling to bushes and grasses, and strange red sand that 
bordered the gap  sand and rocks, barren as though some 
up-draft from the void had killed off vegetable growth 
along the very brink. 

Then all slid back and away. The red-ribbed wall of 
the great chasm, shattered and broken as by some inconceivable disaster, some cosmic cataclysm, fell away and 
away, downward, dimmer and more dim, until it faded 
gradually into a blue haze, then vanished utterly. 

And there below lay nothingness  and nothingness 
stretched out in front to where the sight lost itself in pearly 
vapors that overdimmed the sky. 

Beatrice glanced at Stern as the Pauillac sped true as 
an arrow in its flight, out into this strange and incomprehensible vacuity. 




ON THE LIP OF THE CHASM 297 

Just a shade paler now he seemed. Despite the keen 
wind, a glister of sweat-drops studded his forehead. His 
jaw was set, set hard; she could see the powerful maxillary muscles knotted there where the throat-cords met the 
angle of the bone. And she understood that, for the first 
time since their tremendous adventure had be, the man 
felt shaken by this latest and greatest of all the mysteries 
they had been called upon to face. 

Already the verge lay far behind; and now the sense 
of empty space above and on all sides and there below 
was overpowering. 

Stem gasped with a peculiar choking sound. Then all 
at once, throwing the front steering plane at an angle, he 
brought the machine about and headed for the distant land. 

He spoke no word, nor did she; but they both swept 
the edge of the chasm with anxious eyes, seeking a place 
to light. 

It was with tremendous relief that they both saw the 
solid earth once more below them. And when, five minutes 
later, having chosen a clear and sand-barren on the verge, 
some two miles southward along the abyss, Stem brought 
the machine to earth, they felt a gratitude and a relief not 
to be voiced in words. 

" By Jove ! " exclaimed the man, lifting Beatrice from 
the seat, " if that isn't enough to shake a man's nerve and 
upset all his ideas, geological or otherwise, Fd like to know 
what is ! " 

" Going to try to cross it ? " she asked anxiously ; " that 
is, if there is any other side? I know, of course, that if 
there is you'll find out, some way or other ! " 

" You overestimate me," he replied. " All I can do, for 
now, is to camp down here and try to figure the problem 
out  with your help. Whatever this thing is, it's evident it 
stands between us and our plan. Either Chicago lies on 
the other side  (provided, of course, as you say, that there 
is one)  or else it's been swallowed up, ages ago, by whatever catastrophe produced this yawning gilf . 



f 




298 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" In either event we've got to try to discover the tnith, 
and act accordingly. But for now, there's nothing we can 
do. It's getting late already. We've had enough for one 
day, little girl. Come on, let's make the machine ready 
for the night, and camp down here and have a bite to catPerhaps by to-morrow we may know just what we're up 
against ! " 

The moon had risen, flooding the world with spectral 
light, before the two adventurers had finished their meal. 
All during it they had kept an unusual silence. The presence of that terrible gulf, there not two hundred feet away 
to westward of them, imposed its awe upon their thoughts. 

And after the meal was done, by tacit understanding 
they refrained from trying to approach it or to peer over. 
Too great the risks by night. They spoke but little, and 
presently  exhausted by the trying events of the day  
sought sleep under the vanes of the Pauillac. 

But for an hour, tired as he was, the engineer lay thinking of the chasm, trying in vain to solve its problem or 
to understand how they were to follow any further the 
search for the ruins of Chicago, where fuel was to be had, 
or carry on the work of trying to find some living members 
of the human race. 

Morning found them revived and strengthened. Even 
before they made their fire or prepared their breakfast 
they were exploring along the edge of the gigantic cleft. 

Going first to make sure no rock should crtunble under 
the girl's tread, no danger threaten. Stem tested every foot 
of the way to the very edge of the sheer chasm. 

" Slowly, now ! " he cautioned, taking her hand.  WeVe 
got to be careful here. My God, what a drop !  

Awed, despite themselves, they stood there on a flat 
slab of schist that projected boldly over the void. Seen 
from this point, the immense nothingness opened out below 
them even more terrible than it had seemed from the 
biplane. 

The fact is common knowledge that a height, viewed from 




ON THE LIP OF THE CHASM 299 

a balhxm or aeroplane, is always far less dizzying than 
from a lofty building or a montunent. Giddiness vanishes 
wh no solid support lies under the feet. This fact Stem 
and the girl appreciated to the full as they peered over 
the edge. Ten times more ominous and frightful the vast 
blue mystery beneath them now appeared than it had 
seemed before. 

' Let's look sheer down," said the girl. " By lying flat 
and peering over, there can't be any danger.' 

''All right, but only on condition that I keep tight hold 
of you!" 

Cautiously they lay down and worked their way to the 
edge. The engineer circled Beta's supple waist with his 
arm. 

"Steady, now!" he warned. "When you feel giddy, 
let me know, and we'll go back." 

The effect of the chasm, from the very edge of the rock, 
was terrifying. It was like nothing ever seen by human 
eyes. Peering down into the Grand Canon of the Colorado 
would have been child's play beside it. For this was no 
question of looking down a half-mile, a mile, or even five, 
to some solid bottom. 

Bottom there was none  nothing save dull purple haze, 
shifting vapors, and an unearthly dim light which seemed 
to radiate upward as though the sun's rays, reflected, were 
striving to beat up again. 

" There must be miles and miles of air below us," said 
Stem, "to account for this curious light-effect. Air, of 
course, will eventually cut off the vision. Given a sufficiently thick layer, say a few hundred miles, it couldn't 
be seen through. So if there is a bottom to this place, be 
it one hundred or even five hundred miles down, of course 
we couldn't see it. All we could see would be the air, which 
would give this sort of blue effect." 

" Yes ; but in that case how can we see the sun, or the 
moon, or stars?" 

" Light from above only has to pierce forty or fifty miles 



I 




300 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

of really dense air. Above that height it's excessively rarified. While down below earth-level, of course, it would get 
more and more dense all the time, till at the bottom of a 
five-hundred-mile drop the density and pressure would be 
tremendous." 

Beatrice made no answer. The spectacle she was gazing 
at filled her with solemn thoughts. Jagged, rent and riven, 
the rock extended downward. Here vast and broken ledges 
ran along its flanks  red, yellow, black, all seared and 
burned and vitrified as by the fire of Hell; there huge 
masses, up-piled, seemed about to fall into the abyss. 

A quarter-mile to southward, a rivulet had found its way 
over a projecting ledge. Spraying and silvery it fell, 
till, dissipated by the up-draft from the abyss, it dissolved 
in mist. 

The ledge on which they were lying extended downward 
perhaps three hundred yards, then sloped backward, leaving sheer empty space beneath them. They seemed to be 
poised in mid-heaven. It was totally unlike the sensation 
on a mountain-top, or even floating among the clouds; for 
a moment it seemed to Stern that he was looking up toward 
an unfathomable, infinite dome above him. 

He shuddered, despite his cool and scientific spirit of 
observation. 

" Some chemical action going on somewhere down there," 
said he, half to divert his own attention from his thoughts. 
" Smell that sulphur? If this place wasn't once the scene 
of volcanic activities, Vm no judge! " 

A moderate yet very steady wind blew upward from the 
chasm, freighted with a scent of sulphur and some other 
substance new to Stem. 

Beatrice, all at once overcome by sudden giddiness, drew 
back and hid her face in both hands. 

" No bottom to it  no end ! " she said in a scared tone. 
' Here's the end of the world, right here, and beyond this 
very rock  nothing ! " 

Stem, puzzled, shook his head. 




ON THE LIP OF THE CHASM 301 

''That's really impossible, absurd and ridiculotis, of 
course," he answered. '' There must be something beyond. 
The way this stone falls proves that." 

He pitched a two-pound lump of granite far out into 
the air. It fell vertically, whirling, and vanished with the 
speed of a meteor. 

" If a whole side of the earth had split off, and what 
we see down below there were really sky, of course the 
earth's center of gravity would have shifted," he explainedy 
' and that rock would have fallen in toward the cliff below 
us, not straight down." 

" How can you be sure it doesn't fall that way after the 
impulse you gave it has been lost?" 

''I shall have to make some close scientific tests here, 
lasting a day or two, before I'm positive; but my impression is that this, after all, is only a canon  a split in the 
surface  rather than an actual end of the crust." 

" But if it were a canon, why should blue sky show down 
there at an angle of forty-five degrees?" 

" I'll have to think that out, later," he replied. " Directly 
under us, you see all seems deep purple. That's another 
fact to consider. I tell you, Beatrice, there's more to be 
figured out here than can be done in half an hour. 

" As I see it, some vast catastrophe must have rent the 
earth, a thousand or fifteen hundred years ago, as a result 
of which everybody was killed except you and me. We're 
standing now on the edge of the scar left by that explosion, 
or whatever it was. How deep or how wide that scar 
is, I don't know. Everything depends on our finding out, 
or at least on our guessing it with some degree of accuracy." 

"How so?" 

" Because, don't you see, this chasm stands between us 
and Chicago and the West, and all our hopes of finding 
human life there. And  " 

" Why not coast south along the edge here, and see if we 
can't run across some ruined city or other where we can 
refill the tanks ? " 




302 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" ril think it over," the engineer answered. " In the 
meantime we can camp down here a couple of days or so 
and rest ; and I can make some calculations with a pendultun 
and so on." 

" And if you decide there's probably another side to this 
gulf, what then?" 

" We cross," he said ; then for a while stood silent, musing 
as he peered down into the bottomless abyss that stretched 
there hungrily beneath their narrow observation-rock. 

"We cross, that's all!" 




CHAPTER XXI 

LOST IN THE GREAT ABYSS 

For two days they camped beside the chasm, resting, planning, discussing, while Stem, with improvised transits, pendulums and other apparatus, made tests and observations 
to determine, if possible, the prcq)erties of the great gap. 

During this time they developed some theories r[arding the catastrophe which had swept the world a thousand years ago. 

' It seems highly and increasingly probable to me," the 
engineer said, after long thought, " that we have here the 
actual cause of the vast blight of death that left us two 
alone in the world. I rather think that at the time of the 
great explosion which produced this rent, certain highly 
poisonous gases were thrown off, to impregnate the entire 
atmosphere of the world. Everybody must have been killed 
at once. The poison must have swept the earth clean of 
human life." 

But how did we escape?" asked the girl. 
That's hard telling. I figure it this way : The mephitic 
gas probably was heavy and dense, thus keeping to the 
lower air-strata, following them, over plain and hill and 
mountain, like a blanket of death. 

"Just what happened to us, who can tell? Probably, 
tightly housed up there in the tower, the very highest 
inhabited spot in the world, only a very slight infiltration 
of the gas reached us. If my theory won't work, can you 
suggest a better one? Frankly, I can't; and until we have 
more facts, we've got to take what we have. No matter, the 

303 






t 




304 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

condition remains  we're alive and all the rest are dead; 
and I'm positive this cleft here is the cause of it." 

" But if everybody's dead, as you say, why hunt for 
men ? " 

" Perhaps a handful may have survived among the highlands of the Rockies. I imagine that after the first great 
explosion there followed a series of terrible storms, tornadoes, volcanic eruptions, tidal waves and so on. You 
remember how I found the bones of a whale in lower Broadway ; and many of the ruins in New York show the action 
of the sea  they're laid flat in such a manner as to indicate 
that the island was washed on one or two occasions by 
monster waves. 

" Well, all these disturbances probably finished up what 
few survivors escaped, except possibly among the mountains of the West. A few scattered colonies may have survived a while  mining camps, for instance, or isolated prospectors, or what-not. They may all have died out, or again, 
they may have come together and reestablished some primitive form of barbarous or even savage life by this time. 
There's no telling. Our imperative problem is to reach 
that section and explore it thoroughly. For there, if anywhere, we'll find survivors of our race." 

" How about that great maelstrom that nearly got us? " 
asked the girl. "Can you connect that with the catastrophe ? " 

" I think so. My idea is that, in some way or other, the 
sea is being sucked down into the interior of the earth 
and then hurled out again ; maybe there's a gradual residue 
being left; maybe a great central lake or sea has formed. 
Who knows? At any rate all the drainage system of the 
country seems to have been changed and reversed in the 
most curious and unaccountable manner. I think we should 
find, if we could investigate everything thoroughly, that 
this vast chasm here is intimately connected with the whole 
thing." 

These and many other questions perplexed the travelers. 




LOST IN THE GREAT ABYSS 305 

but most of all they sought to know the breadth of the 
vast gap and to determine if it had, as they hcd, another 
side, or if it were indeed the edge of an enormous mass 
split bodily off the earth. 

Stem believed he had an answer to this problem on the 
afternoon of the second day. For many hours he had 
hung his pendulums over the cliff, noted deflections, taken 
triangulations, and covered the surface of the smooth stone 
with X's, Y% Z's, sines and cosines and abstruse formulae 
 all scrawled with charcoal, his only means of writiM. 

At last he finished the final equation, and, with a smue 
of triumph and relief, got to his feet again. 

Back to the girl, who was cooking over an odorous fire 
of cedar, he made his way, rejoicing. 

" I've got it ! " he shouted gladly. " Making reasonable 
allowances for depth, I've got it ! " 

"Got what?" 

" The probable width I " 

"Oh!" And she stood gazing at him in admiration 
beautiful and strong and graceful. " You mean to say" 

" I'm giving the chasm a hundred miles' depth. That's 
more than anybody could believe possible  twice as much. 
On that assumption, my tests show the distance to the other 
side  and there is another side, by the way J can't be 



over  " 



"Five hundred miles?" 

" Nonsense ! Not over one hundred to one-fifty. I'm 
going on a liberal allowance for error, too. It may not 
be over seventy-five. The  " 

" But if that's as far as it is, why can't we see the other 
side?'' 

"With all that chemicalized vapor rising constantly? 
Who knows what elements may be in it? Or what polarization may be taking place? " 

"Polarization?" 

"I mean, what deflection and alteration of light? Nq 




3o6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

wonder we can't seel But we can fly! And we're goiog 
to, what's more I " 

"Going to make a try for Chicago, then?" she asked, 
her eyes lighting up joyfully at thought of the adventure. 

"To-morrow morning, sure!" 

"But the alcohol?" 

"We've still got what we started with from Detroit, 
minus only what we've burned reaching this place. And 
we reckoned when we set out that it would far more than 
be enough. Oh, that part of it's all right ! " 

" Well, you know best," she answered. " I trust you 
in all things, Allan. But now just look at this roast partridge; come, dear, let to-morrow take care of itself. It's 
supper-time now ! " 

After the meal they went to the flat rock and sat for 
an hour while the sun went down beyond the void. Its 
disappearance seemed to substantiate the polarization 
theory. There was no sudden obliteration of the disk by a 
horizon. Rather the sun faded away, redder and duller; 
then slowly losing form and so becoming a mere blur of 
crimson, which in turn grew purple and so gradually died 
away to nothing. 

For a long time they sat in the deepening gloom, their 
rifles close at hand, saying little, but thinking much. The 
coming of night had sobered them to a sense of what now 
inevitably lay ahead. The solemn purple pall that adumbrated the world and the huge nothingness before them, 
so silent, so immutable and pregnant with terrible mysteries, 
brought them close together. 

The vague, untrodden forest behind them, where the 
night-sounds of the wild dimly reechoed now and then, filled 
them with indefinable emotions. And that night sleep was 
slow in coming. 

Each realized that, despite all caculations and all skill, 
the morrow might be their last day of life. But the morning light, golden and clear above the eastern sky-line of 
tall conifers, dispelled all brooding fears. They were both 




LOST IN THE GREAT ABYSS 307 

up early and astir, in preparaticm for the crucial flight 
Stem went over the edge of the chasm, while Beatrice 
prepared breakfast, and made some final observations of 
wind, air currents and atmosphere density. 

An eagle which he saw soaring over the abyss, more than 
half a inile from its edge, convinced him a strong upward 
current existed tOKlay, as on the day when they had made 
their short flight over the void. The bird soared and circled 
and finally shot away to northward, without a wing-flap, 
almost in the manner of a vulture. Stem knew an eagle 
could not imitate the feat without scxtne aid in the way of 
an up-draft. 

"And if that draft is steady and constant all the way 
across,'' thought he, ' it will result in a big saving of fuel. 
Given a sufficient rising current, we could volplane all the 
way across with a very slight expenditure of alcohol It 
looks now as though ever3rthing were coming on first-rate. 
Couldn't be better. And what a day for an excursion I " 

By nine o'clock all was ready. Along the land a mild 
south wind was blowing. Though the day was probably 
the 5th of October or thereabout, no signs of autumn yet 
were blazoned in the forest. The moming was perfect, 
and the travelers' spirits rose in unison with the abounding beauty of the day. 

Stem had given the Pauillac another final going over, 
tightening the stays and laterals, screwing up here a loosened nut, there a bolt, making certain all was in perfect 
order. 

At nine-fifteen, after he had had a comforting pipe, 
they made a clean getaway, rising along the edge of the 
chasm, then soaring in huge spirals. 

" I want all the altitude I can get," Stern shouted at the 
girl as they climbed steadily higher. "We may need it 
to coast on. And from a mile or two up maybe we can 
get a glimpse of the other side." 

But though they ascended till the aneroid showed eight 
thousand five hundred feet, nothing met their gaze but the 




308 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

same pearly blue vapor which veiled the mystery before 
them. And Stem, satisfied now that nothing could be 
gained by any further ascent, turned the machine due west, 
and sent her skimming like a swallow out over the tremendous nothingness below. 

As the earth faded behind them they began to feel distinctly a warm and pungent wind that rose beneath  a steady 
current, as from some huge chimney that lazily was pouring 
out its monstrous volume of hot vapors. 

Away and away behind them slid the lip of this gigantic 
gash across the world; and now already with the swift 
rush of the plane the solid earth had begun to fade and 
to grow dim. 

Stem only cast a glance at the sun and at his compass, 
hung there in gimbals before him, and with firm hand 
steadied the machine for the long problematical flight to 
westward. Behind them the sun kept even with their 
swift pace; and very far below and ahead, at times they 
thought to see the fleeing shadow of the biplane cast now 
and then on masses of formless vapor that rose from the 
unsounded deeps. 

Definitely committed now to this tremendous venture, 
both Stem and the girl settled themselves more firmly in 
their seats. No time to feel alarm, no time for introspection, or for thoughts of what might lie below, what fate 
theirs must be if the old Pauillac failed them now ! 

No time save for confidence in the stout mechanism and 
in the skill of hand and brain that was driving the great 
planes, with a roaring rush like a gigantic gull, a swooping 
rise and fall in long arcs over the hills of air, across the 
vast enigma of that space! 

Stern's whole attention was fixed on driving, just on the 
manipulation of the swift machine. Exhaust and interplay, the rhythm of each whirling cam and shaft, the chatter 
of the cylinders, the droning diapason of the blades, all 
blent into one intricate yet perfect harmony of mechanism ; 
and as a leader knows each instnunent in the great orches



LOST IN THE GREAT ABYSS 30$ 

tra and follows each, even as his eye reads the score, so 
Stem's keen ear analyzed each sound and action and reactkm 
and knew all were in perfect tune and resonance. 

The machine  no early and experimental model, such 
as were used in the first days of flying, from 1900 to 191 5 
bat one of the perfected and self-balancing types developed 
about 1920, the year when the Great Death had struck the 
world  responded nobly to his skill and care. From her 
landing-skids to the farthest tip of her ailerons she seemed 
alive, instinct with conscious and eager intelligence. 

Stem blessed her mentally with special pride and ccmfidence in her mercury equalizing balances. Proud of his 
machine and of his skill, superb like Phaeton whirling the 
sun-chariot across the heavens, he gave her more and still 
more speed. 

Below nothing, nothing save vapors, with here and there 
an open space where showed the strange dull purple of the 
abyss. Above, to right, toMeft, nothing  absolute vacant 
space. 

Gone now was all sight of the land that they had left 
Unlike balloonists who always see dense clouds or else 
the earth, they now saw nothing. All alone with the sun 
that rushed behind them in their skimming flight, they 
fled like wraiths across the emptiness of the great void. 

Stem glanced at the barometer, and grunted with surprise. 

" H'm ! Twelve thousand four hundred and fifty feet 
and I've been jockeying to come down at least five hundred 
feet already ! " thought he. " How the devil can that be?' 

The explanation came to him. But it surprised him 
almost as much as the noted fact. 

" Must be one devil of a wind blowing up out of that 
place," he pondered, ' to carry us up nearly four thousand 
feet, when I've been trying to descend. Well, it's all right, 
anyhow  it all helps." 

He looked at the spinning anemometer. It registered a 
speed of ninety-seven miles an hour. Yet now that they 



f 




310 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

were out of sight of any land, only the rush of the wind 
and the enormous vibration of the plane conveyed an idea 
of motion. They might as well have been hung in midspace, like Mohammed's tomb, as have bem rushing forward; there was no visible means of judging what their 
motion really might be. 

" Unique experience in the history of mankind I " shouted 
Stem to the girl. " The world's invisible to us." 

She nodded and smiled back at him, her white teeth 
gleaming in the strange, bluish light that now enveloped 
them. 

Stem, keenly attentive to the engine, advanced the spark 
another notch, and now the needle crept to 102. 

" We'll be across before we know it," thought he. " At 
this rate, I shouldn't be surprised to sight land any minute 



now." 



A quarter-hour more the Pauillac swooped along, cradling 
in her swift flight to westward. 

But all at once the man started violently. Forward he 
bent, staring with widened eyes at the tube of the fuel-gage. 

He blinked, as though to convince himself he had not 
seen aright, then stared again; and as he looked a sudden 
grayness overspread his face. 

" What? ' he exclaimed, then raised his head and for 
a moment sniffed, as though to catch some odor, elusive 
yet ominous, which he had for some time half sensed yet 
paid no heed to. 

Then suddenly he knew the tmth; and with a cry of 
fear bent, peering at the fuel-tank. 

There, quivering suspended from the metal edge of the 
aluminum tank, hung a single clear white drop  alcohol! 

Even as Stem looked it fell, and at once another took 
its place, and was shaken off only to be succeeded by a third, 
a fourth, a fifth! 

The man understood. The ancient metal, corroded almost 
through from the inside, had been eaten away. That very 
morning a hole had formed in the tank. And now a leak  



LOST IN THE GREAT ABYSS 



311 



existing since what moment he could not tell  was draining 
the very Ufe-blood of the machine, 

"The alcohol!" cried Stern in a hoarse, terrible voice, 
his wide eyes denoting his agitation. With a quivering 
hand he pointed. 

" My God t It's all leaked out  there's not a quart left 
in the tank! Wre lost  lost in the bottomless abyss}" 



f 




CHAPTER XXII 

LIGHTS ! 

At realization of the ghastly situation that confronted them. 
Stem's heart stopped beating for a moment. Despite his 
courage, a sick terror gripped his soul; he felt a sudden 
weakness, and in his ears the rushing wind seemed shouting 
mockeries of death. 

As in a dream he felt the girl's hand close in fear upon 
his arm, he heard her crying something  but what, he knew 
not. 

Then all at once he fought off the deadly horror. He 
realized that now, if ever, he needed all his strength, resource, intelligence. And, with a violent effort, he flung 
off his weakness. Again he gripped the wheel. Thought 
returned. Though the end might be at hand, thank God 
for even a minute's respite ! 

Again he looked at the indicator. 

Yes, only too truly it showed the terrible fact! No hallucination, this. Not much more than a pint of the precious fluid now lay in the fuel tank. And though the engine 
still roared, he knew that in a minute or two it must slaen, 
stop and die. 

What then? 

Even as the question flashed to him, the engine bariced 
its protest. It skipped, coughed, stuttered. Too well he 
knew the symptoms, the imperative cry : " More fuel I '' 

But he had none to give. In vain for him to open wide 
the supply valve. Vain to adjust the carburetor. Even as 
he made a despairing, instinctive motion to perform these 

312 



LIGHTS! 313 

useless acts  while Beatrice, deathly pale and sliaking with 
terror, clutched at hira  the engine spat forth a last, convulsive bark, and grew silent. 

The whirling screws hummed a lower note, then ceased 
their song and came to rest. 

The machine lurched forward, swooped, spiraled, and 
with a sickening rush, a flailing tumult of the stays and 
planes, plunged into nothingness! 

Had Stern and the girl not been securely strapped to 
their seats, they must have been precipitated into space by 
the violent, erratic dashes, drops, swerves and rushes of 
the uncontrolled Pauillac. 

For a moment or two. instinctively despite the knowledge 
that it could do no good, Stem wrenched at the levers. A 
thousand confused, wild, terrible impressions surged upon 
his consciousness. 

Swifter, swifter dropped the plane; and now the wind 
that seemed to rise had grown to be a hurricane I Its roaring in their ears was deafening. They had to fight even for 
breath itself. 

Beatrice was leaning forward now, sheltering her face 
in the hollow of her arm. Had she fainted? Stem could 
not tell. He still was fighting with the mechanism, striving to bring it into some control. But, without headway, 
it defied him. And like a wounded hawk, dying even as it 
struggled, the Pauillac staggered wildly down the unplumbed abyss. 

How long did the first wild drop last? Stem knew not. 
He realized only that, after a certain time, he felt a warm 
sensation; and, looking, perceived that they were now 
plunging through vapors that sped upward  so it seemed 
with vertiginous rapidity. 

No sensation now was there of falling. All motion 
seemed to lie in the upmshiiig vajHirs, dense and warm 
and pale violet in hue. A vast and rhythmic apiraling had 
possessed the Pauillac. As you have seen a falling leaf 
turn in air, so the plane circled, boring with terrific speed 




314 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

down, down, down through the mists, down into the unknown ! 

Nothing to be seen but vapors. No solid body, no land, 
no earth to mark their fall and gauge it. Yet slowly, steadily, darkness was shrouding them. And Stern, breathing 
with great difficulty even in the shelter of his arms, could 
now hardly more than see as a pale blur the white face of 
the girl beside him. 

The vast wings of the machine, swirling, swooping, 
plunging down, loomed hugely vague in the deepening shadows. Dizzy, sick with the monstrous caroming through 
space, deafened by the thunderous roaring of the up-draft, 
Stern was still able to retain enough of his scientific curiosity to peer upward. The sun! Could he still see it? 

Vanished utterly was now the glorious orb! There, 
seeming to circle round and round in drunken spirals, he 
beheld a weird, diffused, angry-looking blotch of light, tinted 
a hue different from any ever seen on earth by men. And 
involuntarily,, at sight of this, he shuddered. 

Already with the prescience of death full upon him, with 
a numb despair clutching his soul, he shrank from that 
ghastly, hideous aspect of what he knew must be his last 
sight of the sun. 

Around the girl he drew his right arm ; she felt his muscles tauten as he clasped her to him. Useless now, he knew, 
any further struggles with the aeroplane. Its speed, its 
plummetlike drop checked only by the huge sweep of its 
parachute wings. Stern knew now it must fall clear to the 
bottom of the abyss  if bottom there were. And if not  
what then? 

Stern dared not think. All human concepts had been 
shattered by this stupendous catastrophe. The sickly and 
unnatural hue of the rushing vapors that tore and slatted 
the planes, confused his senses; and, added to this, a stifling, numbing gas seemed diffused through the inchoate 
void. 




LIGHTS 1 



He tried to speak, but could not. Against the girl's 
cheek he pressed his own. Hers was cold! 

In vain he struggled to cry out. Even had his parched 
tongue been able to voice a sound, the howling tempest 
they themselves were creating as they fell, would have 
whipped the shout away and drowned it in the gloom. 

In Stern's ears roared a droning as of a billion hornets. 
He felt a vast, tremendous lassitude. Inside his head it 
seemed as though a huge, merciless pressure were grinding 
at his very brain. His breath came only slowly and with 
great difficulty. 

' My God 1 " he panted. " Oh, for a little fuel ! Oh, 
for a chance  a chance to fight  for life 1 " 

But chance there was none, now. Before his eyes there 
seemed to darken, to dazzle, a strange and moving curtain. 
Through il, piercing it with a supreme effort of the will, he 
caught dim sight of the dial of the chronometer. Subconsciously he noted that it marked 11.25. 

How long had they been falling? In vain his wavering 
intelligence battered at the problem. Now, as in a delirium, 
he fancied it had been only minutes; then it seemed hours. 
Like an insane man he laughed  he tried to scream  he 
raved. And only the stout straps that had held them 
both prevented him from leaping free of the hurtling machine. 

" Crack ! " 

A lashing had given way I Part of the left hand plane 
had broken loose. Drunkenly, whirling head over like an 
albatross shot in mid-air, the Pauillac plunged. 

It righted, swerved, shot far ahead, then once again 
somersaulted. 

Stem had disjointed, crazy thoughts of air-pressure, condensation and compression, resistance, abstruse formula. 
To him it seemed that some gigantic problem in stress-calculation were being hurled at him, to solve  it seemed that, 
blind, deaf, dumb, some sinister and ghoul-like demon were 



 




3i6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

flailing him until he answered  and that he could not 
answer I 

He had a dim realization of straining madly at his strss 
till the veins started big and swollen in his hammering 
brows. Then consciousness lapsed. 

Lapsed, yet came again  and with it pain. An awftd 
pain in the ear-drums, that roared and crackled without 
cease. 

Breath! He was fighting for breath! 

It was a nightmare  a horrible dream of darkness and 
a mighty booming wind  a dream of stifling vapors and an 
endless void that sucked them down, down, down, etemaUy ! 

Delusions came, and mocking visions of safety. Both 
hands flung out as though to clutch the roaring gale, he 
fought the intangible. 

Again he lost all knowledge. 

And once again  how long after, how could he know?  
he came to some partial realization of tortured existence. 

In one of the mad downward rushes  rushes which ended 
in a long spiral slant  his staring, bloodshot eyes that 
sought to pierce the murk, seemed to behold a glimmer, a 
dull gleam of light. 

The engineer screamed imprecations, mingled with wild, 
demoniac laughter. 

' Another hallucination !  was his thought. " But if it's 
not  if it's Hell  then welcome. Hell ! Welcome even that, 
for a chance to stop ! " 

A sweep of the Pauillac hid the light from view. Even 
that faintest ray vanished. But  what? It came again I 
Much nearer now, and brighter! And  another gleam I 
Another still ! Three of them  and they were real! 

With a tremendous effort. Stern fixed his fevered eyes 
upon the lights. 

Up, up at a tremendous rate they seemed speeding. Blue 
and ghastly through the dense vapors, spinning in giddy gyrations, as the machine wheeled, catapulted and slid Ivom 



LIGHTS ! 



3J7 



one long slant to another, their relative positions still remained fixed. 

And, with a final flicker of intelligence, Stem knew they 
were no figment of his brain. 

" Lights, Beatrice ! Lights, lights, real lights ! " he sought 
to scream. 

But even as he fought to shake her from the swoon that 
wrapped her senses, his own last fragment of strength 
deserted him. 

He had one final sense impression of a swift upshooting 
of the hghts, a sudden brightening of those three radiant 
points. 

Then came a sudden gleam as though of waters, black and 
still. 

A gleam, blue and uncanny, across the inky surface o 
some vast, mysterious, hidden sea. 

Up rushed the lights at hira; up rushed the sea of 
jetty black! 

Stern shouted some wild, incoherent thing. 

Crash 1 

A shock! A frightful impact, swift, sudden, annihilatmg! 

Then in a mad and lashing struggle, all knowledge and 
all feeling vanished utterly. And the blackness of oblivion 
received him into its insensate bosom. 



 




CHAPTER XXIII 



THE WHITE BARBARIANS 



Warmth, wetness, and a knowledge of great weakness  
these, joined with a singular lassitude, oppression of the 
lungs and stifling of the breath, were Allan Stern's sensations when conscious life returned. 

Pain there was as well. His body felt sorely bruised 
and shaken. His first thought, his intense yearning wonder 
for the girl's welfare and his sickening fear lest she be 
dead, mingled with some attempt to analyze his own suffering; to learn, if possible, what damage he had taken in 
flesh and bone. 

He tried to move, but found he could not. Even Isring 
inert, as he now found himself, so great was the exertion 
to breathe that only by a fight could he keep the breath of 
life in his shaken frame. 

He opened his eyes. 

Light! Could it be? Light in that place? 

Yes, the light was real, and it was shining directly in 
his face. 

At first all that his disturbed, half-delirious vision could 
make out was a confused bluish glare. But in a moment 
this resolved itself into a smoking, blazing cresset. Stern 
could now distinctly see the metal bands of the fire-basket 
in which it lay, as well as a supporting staff, about five feet 
long, that seemed to vanish downward in the gloom. 

And, understanding nothing, filled with vague, halfinsane hallucinations and wild wonders, he tried to struggle 
upward with a babbling cry : 

"Beatrice! Oh, Beatrice  where are youf 

318 




THE WHITE BARBARIANS 319 

To his intense astonishment, a human hand, bluish in 
the strange glare, laid itself upon his breast and pushed 
him down again. 

Above him he saw a face, wrinkled, bearded and ghastly 
blue. And as he struggled still he perceived by the unearthly lit that a figure was bending over him. 

" A man I " he gulped. " Man 1 Man! Oh, my God I 
At last a man I" 

He tried to raise himself upon his elbow, for his whole 
soul was flooded with a sudden gratitude and love and joy 
in presence of that long-sought goal. But instantly, as 
soon as his dazed senses could convey the terrible impression to his brain, his joy was curdled into blank astonishment and fear and grief. 

For to his intense chagrin, strive as he might, he could 
move neither hand nor foot I 

During his unconsciousness, which had lasted he could 
not tell how long, he had been securely bound. And now, 
awakening slowly, once more, fighting his way up into consciousness, he found himself a prisoner 1 

A prisoner! With whom? Among what people  with 
what purpose? After the long quest, the frightful hardships and the tremendous fall into the abyss, a prisoner! 

" Merciful God ! " groaned Stem, and in his sudden 
anguish, strained against the bonds, that drawn tight and 
fast, were already cutting painfully into his swollen, watersodden flesh. 

In vain did he struggle. Terrible thoughts that Beatrice, 
too, might be subjected to this peril and humiliation 
branded themselves upon his brain. He shouted wildly, 
calling her name, with all the force of his spent lungs; but 
naught availed. There came no answer but the shrouding 
fogs. 

The strange man bent above him, peering from beneath 
wrinkled brows. Stem heard a few words in a singular, 
guttural tone  words rendered dull by the high compression of the air. What the words might be he could not 



i 




320 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

tell, yet their general sound seemed strangely familiar and 
their command was indubitable. 

But, still half -delirious, Stern tried again to stretch up 
his arms, to greet this singular being, even as a sick man 
recovering from etherization raves and half sees the nurses ' 
and doctors, yet dreams wild visions in the midst of pain. 

The man, however, only shook his head, and with a broad, 
firm hand, again held the engineer from trying to sit up. 
Stem, understanding nothing clearly, relapsed to quietude. 
To him the thought came : " This is only another delusion 
after all ! ' And then a vast and poignant woe possessed 
him  a wonder where the girl might be. But under the 
compulsion of that powerful hand, he lay quite still. 

Half consciously he seemed to realize that he was lying 
prone in the bottom of some strange kind of boat, rude 
and clumsy, strangely formed of singular materials, yet 
safe and dry and ample. 

To his laboring nostrils penetrated a rank and pungent 
odor of fish, with another the like of which he never had 
known  an odor not unpleasant, yet keenly penetrant and 
all-pervading. Wet through, the engineer lay reeking in 
heat and steam, wrapped in his suit of heavy furs. Then 
he heard a ripple of water and felt the motion of the craft 
as it was driven forward. 

Another voice spoke now and the strange man answered 
briefly. Again the engineer half seemed to comprehend 
the meaning, though no word was intelligible. 

"Where's the girl, you?' he shouted with all his might. 
"What have you done with her? If you hurt her, damn 
you, you'll be sorry ! Where  where is she? " 

No answer. It was evident that English speech conveyed 
no meaning to his captors. Stern relapsed with a groan of 
anguish and sheer pain. 

The boat rocked. Another man came creeping forward, 
holding to the gunwale to steady himself. Stem saw him 
vaguely through the drifting vapor by the blue-geen light 
of the cresset at the bow. 




THE WHITE BARBARIANS jal 

He was clad in a coarse kind of brownish staff, like tlNf 
first, roughly and loosely woven. His long hair, pure white, 
was twisted up in a kind of topknot and fastened there by 
pins of dull gold. Bearded he was, but not one hair upon 
his head or chin was other than silvery white  a color common to all these folk, as Stern was soon to know. 

This man, evidently seeing with perfect clarity by a light 
which permitted the engineer only partial vision, also examined Stem and made speech thereto and nodded with satisfaction. 

Then he put half a dozen questions to the prisoner with 
evident slowness and an attempt to speak each word distinctly, but nothing came of this. And with a contemptuous 
grunt he went back to his paddle. 

" Hold on, there ! " cried Stern. " Can't you understand? 
There were two of us, in a  machine, you know 1 We fell. 
Fell from the surface of the earth  fell all the way down 
into this pit of hell, whatever it is. Where's the girl ? For 
God's sake, tell me!" 

Neither man paid any heed, but the elder suddenly set 
hollowed palms to his lips and hailed; and frcnn acrosa 
the waters dully drifted another answering cry. 

He shouted a sentence or two with a volume of noise at 
which the engineer marveled, for so compressed was the 
air that Stem's best effort could hardly throw a sound fifty 
feet. This characteristic of the atmosphere he well recognized from work he had often done in bridge and tunnel 
caissons. And a wonder possessed him, despite his keen 
anxiety, how any race of men could live and grow and develop the evident physical force of these people under conditions so unnatural. 

Turning his head and wrenching his neck sidewise, he 
was able to catch a glimpse of the water, over the low gunwale  a gunwale made, like the framework of the boat 
itself, of thin metallic strips cleverly riveted. 

There, approaching through the mists, he got sight of 
another boat, also provided with its cresset that flung an un



322 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

canny shaft of i)lue across the jetty expanse  a boat now 
drawing near under the urge of half-seen oarsmen. And 
farther still another torch was visible; and beyond that a 
dozen, a score or more, all moving with dim and ghostly 
slowness, through the blind abyss of fog and heat and 
drifting vapors. 

Stem gathered strength for another appeaL 

"Who are you people?" cried he passionately. "What 
are you going to do with us? Where are we  and what 
kind of a place are we in? Any way to get out, out to the 
world, again? And the girl  that girl! Oh, great God I 
Can't you answer something?  

No reply. Only that same slow, strong paddling, awful 
in its purposeful deliberation. Stem questioned in French, 
Spanish and German, but got not even the satisfaction of 
attracting their attention. He flung what few phrases of 
Latin and Esperanto he had at them. No result. And a 
huge despair filled his soul, a feeling of utter and absolute 
helplessness. 

For the first time in his life  that life which had covered 
a thousand years or more  he found himself unable to make himself intelligible. He had not now even 
recourse to gestures, to sign language. Bound hand and 
foot, trussed like a fowl, ignored by his captors (who, by 
all rules, should have been his hosts and shown him every 
courtesy), he felt a profound and terrible anger growing in 
his heart. 

A sudden rage, unreasoning and insensate, blazed within 
him. His fists clenched; once more he tugged, straining 
at his stout bonds. He called down maledictions on those 
two strange, impassive, wraithlike forms hardly more than 
half seen in the darkness and fog. 

Then, as delirium won again over his tortured senses and 
disjointed thoughts, he shouted the name of Beatrice time 
after time out into the echoing dark that brooded over the 
great waters. 



THE WHITE BARBARIANS 



33 



All at once he heard her voice, trembling and faint and 
weak, but still hers 1 

From the other boat it came, the boat now drawing very 
near. And as the craft loomed up through the vapors 
that rose incessantly from that Stygian sea, he made a 
mighty effort, raised himself a little and suddenly beheld 
her-  dim, vague, uncertain in the shuddering bluish glare, 
yet still alive! 

She was crouching midships of the canoe and, seemingly, 
was not bound. At his hail she stretched forth a hand 
and answered with his name. 

" Oh, Allan ! Allan ! " Her voice was tremulous and 
very weak. 

"Beatrice! You're safe? Thank God I" 

"Hurt? Are you hurt?" 

" No  nothing to speak of. These demons haven't done 
you any damage, have they? If so  " 

" Demons ? Why, Allan I They've rescued us, haven't 
they ? " 

" Yes  and now they've got me tied here, hand and foot ! 
I can't more than just move about two or three inches, 
hlist them ! They haven't tied you, have they ? " 

"No," she answered. "Not yet! But  what an outrage! I'll free you, never fear. You and I Kether  " 

" Can't do anything, now, girl. There may be hundreds 
of these people. Thousands, perhaps. And we're only 
two  two captives, and  wellhang it, Beatrice! I don't 
mean to be pessimistic or anything like that, but it certainly 
looks bad ! " 

" But who are they, boy? Who can they be? And where 
are we ? " 

"Hanged if I know! This certainly beats any dream I 
ever had. For sheer outrageous improbability  " 

He broke off short. Beatrice had leaned her head upon 
her arms, along the gunwale of the other canoe which now 
was running parallel to Stern's, and he knew the girl was 
weeping. 




324 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" There, there ! " he cried to her. " Don't you be afraid, 
little girl 1 I've got my automatic yet ; I can feel it tuider 
me, as I lie here in this infernal boat They haven't taken 
yours away ? " 

" No ! " she answered, raising her head again. " And 
before they ever do, I'll use it, that's all I " 

" Good girl ! " he cheered her, across the space of water. 
" That's the way to talk ! Whatever happens, shoot straight 
if you have to shoot at all  and remember, at worst, the 
last cartridge is for yourself 1 " 



CHAPTER XXIV 

THE LAND OF THE MERUCAANS 

" I'll remember," she answered simply, and for a little 
space there came silence between them. 

A vast longing possessed the man to take her in his arms 
and hold her tight, tight to his fast-throbbing heart. But 
he lay bound and helpless. All he could do was call to her 
again, as the two canoes now drew on, side by side and 
as still others, joining them, made a tittle fleet of strange, 
flare-lighted craft. 

"Beatrice! " 

" Yes what is it?" 

" Don't worry, whatever happens. Maybe there's no 
great harm done, after all. We're still alive and sound   
that's ninety-nine per cent of the battle." 

" How could we have fallen like that and not been 
killed ? A miracle I " 

" The machine must have struck the surface on one of 
its long slants. If it had plunged straight down  well, we 
shouldn't be here, that's all. These infernal pirates, whoever they are, must have been close by, in their boats, and 
cut us loose from our straps before the machine sank, and 
got us into their canoes. But  " 

" Without the machine, how are we ever going to get 
out of here again?" 

" Don't iKhther about that now ! We've got other more 
important things to think of. It's all a vast and complex 
problem, but we'll meet it, never fear. You and 1, together, 
are going to win! We've got to  for the sake of the 
Oridl" 

325 




326 DARKNESS AND DAWN 



" Oh, if they'd only take us for gods, as the Horde did ! " 

"Gods nothing! They're as white as we are  whiter, 
even. People that can make boats like these, out of iron 
bars covered with pitched fabric, and weave cloth like 
this they're wearing, and use oil-flares in metal baskets, 
aren't mistaking us for gods. The way they've handled 
me proves it. Might be a good thing if they weren't so 
devilish intelligent ! " 

He relapsed into silence, and for a while there came no 
sound but the cadenced dipping of many paddles as the 
boats, now perhaps a score in niunber, all slowly moved 
across the unfathomed black as though toward some objec " 
tive common point. Each craft bore at its bow a iire-Basket 
filled with some spongy substance, which, oil-soaked, blazed 
smokily with that peculiar blue-green light so ghostly in 
its wavering reflections. 

Many of fhe folk sat in these boats, among their brown 
fiber nets and long, iron-tipped lances. All alike were 
pale and anemic-looking, though well-muscled and of vigorous build. Even the youngest were white-haired. All 
wore their hair twisted in a knot upon the crown of the 
head ; none boasted anything even suggesting a hat or cap. 

By contrast with their chalky skins, white eyebrows and 
lashes, their pinkish eyes  for all the world like those of 
an albino  blinked oddly as they squinted ahead, as though 
to catch some sign of land. Every one wore a kind of cassock of the brown coarse material ; a few were girdled with 
kelts of skin, having well-wrought metal buckles. Their 
paddles were not of wood. Not one trace of wood, in fact, 
was anywhere to be seen. Light metal blades, well-shaped 
and riveted to iron handles, served for propulsion. 

Stem lay back, still faint and sick with the shock of the 
fall and with the pain, humiliation and excitement of the 
capture. Yet through it all he rejoiced that the girl and 
he had escaped with life and were both still sound of limb 
and faculty. 

Even the loss of the machine could not destroy all his nat


THE LAND OF THE MERUCAANS327 

Ural enthusiasm, or kill his satisfaction in this great adventuring, his joy at having found after all, a remnant of the 
human race once more. 

" Men, by the Almighty ! " thought he, peering keenly at 
such as he could see through the coiling, spiraling wreaths 
of mist that arose from the black water into the dun air. 
" Men! IVhite men, toot Given such stock to work with 
 provided I get the chance  who shall say anything's impossible? If only there's some way out of this infernal 
hole, what may not happen ? " 

And, as he watched, he thrilled with nascent pride, with 
consciousness of a tremendous mission to perform; a sense 
that here  here in the actual living flesh  dweU the potentialities of all his dreams, of all the many deep and noble 
plans which he and Beatrice had laid for a regenerated 
world 1 

Men they certainly were, white men, Caucasians, even 
like himself. Despite all changes of superficial character, 
their build and cast of features bore witness that these incredible folk, dwellers upon that nameless and buried 
sea, were the long-distant descendants of Americans! 

" Americans, so help me ! " he pondered as the boats drew 
onward toward what goal he knew not. " Barbarians, yet 
Americans, still. And with half a chance at them, Godl 
well work miracles yet, she and I!" 

Again he raised his voice, calling to Beatrice: 

"Don't be afraid, little girl! They're our own people, 
after allAraericansi" 

At sound of tliat word a startled cry broke from the lips 
of Stern's cider boatman, a cry which, taken up from boat 
to boat, drifted dully through the fog, traversed the whole 
fleet of strange, slow-moving craft, and lost itself in the 
vague gloom. 

" Alerucaans! Merucaans!" the shout arose, with other 
words whereof Stern knew not the meaning; and closer 
pressed the outlying boats. The engineer felt a thrill run 
through the strange, mysterious folk. 



t 




328 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" They knew their name, anyhow ! Hurrah ! " he exulted. " God ! If we had the Stars and Stripes here, I 
wager a million they'd go mad about it ! Remember? You 
bet they'll remember, when I learn their lingo and tell them 
a few things! Just wait till I get a chance at 'em, that's 
all I " 

Forgotten now his bonds and all his pain. Forgotten 
even the perilous situation. Stem's great vision of a reborn race had swallowed minor evils. And with a sudden 
glow of pride that some of his own race had still survived 
the vast world catastrophe, he cheered again, eager as any 
schoolboy. 

Suddenly he heard the girl's voice calling to him : 

" Something ahead, Allan  land, maybe. A big light 
through the mist ! " 

He wrenched his head a trifle up and now perceived that 
through the vapors a dim yet steady glow was beginning 
to shine, and on each side of it there stretched a line of 
other, smaller, blue-green lights. These, haloed by the 
vapor with the most beautiful prismatic rings, extended in 
an irregular row high above water level. 

Lower down other lights were moving slowly to and fro, 
gathering for the most part at a point toward which the 
boats were headed. 

" A settlement, Beatrice ! A town, maybe ! At last  
men, men!' he cried. 

Forward the boats moved, faster now, as the rowers bent 
to their tasks ; and all at once, spontaneously, a song rose 
up. First from one boat, then another, that weird, strange 
melody drifted through the dark air. It blended into a 
spectral chorus, a vague, tremulous, eery chant, ghostlike 
and awful, as though on the black stream of Acheron the 
lost souls of a better world had joined in song. 

Nothing could Stern catch of the words; but like some 
faint and far re-echoing of a half-heard melody, dreammusic perhaps, a vaguely reminiscent undertone struck to 
his heart with an irresistible, melancholy, penetrant appeal. 



THE LAND OF THE MERUCAANS329 

"That tune! I know it  if I could only think!" the 
engineer exclaimed. "Those words! I almost seem to 
know them ! " 

Then, with the suddenness characteristic of all that drew 
near in the fog, the shore-lights grew rapidly bigger and 
more bright. 

The rowers lay back on their paddles at a sharp word of 
command from one of tlic oarsmen in Stern's boat. 

Came a grating, a sliding of keels on pebbles. The 
boat stopped. Others came up to laud. From them men 
began clambering. 

The song died. A sound of many voices rose, as the 
boatmen mingled with those who, bearing torches, now 
began gathering about the two canoes where Stern and Beatrice still were. 

"Well, we're here, anyhow, wherever here is!" exclaimed the engineer. " Hey, you fellows, let me loose, 
will you? What kind of a way is this to treat a stranger, 
I'd like to know? " 

Two of the men waded through the water, tepid as new 
milk, to where Stern lay fast-bound, lifted him easily and 
carried him ashore. Black though the water was. Stern 
.saw that it was clear. As the torch-light struck down 
through it, he conid distinguish the clean and sandy bottom 
shining with metallic luster. 

A strange hissing sound pervaded all the air, now sinking 
to a dull roar, now rising shrill as a vast jet of escaping 
steam. 

As the tone lowered, darkness seemed to gain, through 
the mists; its rising brought a clearer light. But what the 
phenomenon was. Stern could not tell. For the source of 
the faint, diffused illumination that verberated through 
the vapor was hidden; it seemed to be a huge and fluctuating glow, off there somewhere beyond the fog-curtain that 
veiled whatever land this strange weird place might be. 

Vague, silent, dim, the wraithlike men stood by, peering 
with bent brows, just as Dante described the lost souls in 




330 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Hell peering at Virgil in the eternal night. A dreamcrew they seemed. Even though Stem felt the vorous 
muscles of the pair who now had borne him up to land, he 
could scarce realize their living entity. 

" Beatrice ! Beatrice ! " he called. " Are you all right ? 
Don't mind about me  just look out for yourself I If they 
hurt you in any way, shoot ! " 

"Fm all right, Fm coming 1" He heard her voice, and 
then he saw the girl herself. Unaided she had clambered 
from her boat; and now, breaking through the throng, she 
sought to reach him. But hands held her back, and words 
of hard command rose from a score of lips. 

Stern had only time to see that she was as yet unharmed 
when with a quick slash of a blade somebody cut the thongs 
that bound his feet. 

Then he was pushed forward, away from the dim and 
ghostly sea up an acclivity of smooth black pebbles all wet 
with mist. 

Limping stiffly, by reason of his cramped muscles, he 
stumbled onward, while all about him and behind him  
as about the girl, who followed  came the throng of these 
strange people. 

Their squinting, pinkish eyes and pallid faces showed 
ghastly by the torch-glare, as, murmuring among themselves 
in their incomprehensible yet strangely familiar tongue, 
they climbed the slope. 

Even then, even there on that unknown beach beside an 
uncharted sea at the bottom of the fathomless abyss. 
Stern thought with joy of his revolver which still swung 
on his hip. 

" God knows how we're going to talk to these people,' 
reflected he, " or what sort of trouble they've got ready to 
hand out to us. But, once I get my right hand free  I'm 
ready for whatever comes I " 



CHAPTER XXV 



THE DUNGEON OF TUE SKELETONS 



As the two interlopers from the outer world moved up the 
slippery beach toward the great, mist-dimmed flare, escorted 
by the strange and spectral throng. Stern had time to analyze 
some factors of the situation. 

it was evident that diplomacy was now  unless in a 
sharp crisis  the only role to play. How many of these 
people there might be he could not tell. The present gathering he estimated at about a hundred and fifty or a 
hundred and seventy-five; and moment by moment more 
were comity down the slope, looming through the vapor, 
each carrying a cresset on a staff or a swinging light attached to a chain. 

"The village or settlement, or whatever it is," thought 
he, " may contain hundreds of them, thousands perhaps. 
And we are only two .' The last thing in the world we want 
is a fight. But if it comes to fighting, Beatrice and I with 
our backs to the wall could certainly make a mighty good 
showing against barbarians such as these. 

" It's evident from the fact that they haven't taken our 
revolvers away they don't know the use of 6rearm3. Ages 
ago they must have forgotten even the tradition of such 
weapons. Their culture status seems to be a kind of advanced barbarism. Some job, here, to bring them up to 
civilization again." 

Slow-moving, unemotional, peering dimly through the hot 
fog, their wraithlike appearance (as more and more came 
crowding) depressed and saddened Stern beyond all telling. 




332 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

And at thought that these were the remnants of the race 
which once had conquered a vast continent, built tall cities 
and spanned abysses with steel  the remnants of so many 
million keen, energetic, scientific people  he groaned dc 
spairingly. 

" What does all this mean?" he exclaimed in a kind of 
passionate outburst. " Where are we ? How did you get 
here? Can't you understand me? We're Americans, I 
tell you  Americans! For God's sake, can't you understand? " 

Once more the word ' Merucaans" passed round from 
mouth to mouth ; but beyond this Stern got no sign of comprehension. 

" Village ! Houses ! " shouted he. " Shelter ! Rest, eat, 
sleep!" 

They merely shoved him forward up the slope, together 
with the girl ; and now Stern saw a curious kind of causeway, paved with slippery, wet, black stones that gleamed in 
the torchlight, a causeway slanting sharply upward, its further end hidden in the dense vapor behind which the great 
and unknown light shone with ever-clearer glowing. 

This road was bordered on either hand by a wall of 
carefully cut stone about three and a half feet high; and 
into the wall, at equal distances of twenty feet or so, ircHi 
rods had been let. Each rod bore a fire-basket, some only 
dully flickering, some burning bright and blue. 

Numbers of the strange folk were loitering on the causeway or coming down to join the throng which now ascended ; 
many clambered lithely up onto the wall, and, holding to 
the rods or to each other  for the stones, like everything 
here, were wet and glairy  watched with those singular-hued 
and squinting eyes of theirs the passage of the strangers. 

Stern and Beatrice, their breathing now oppressed by 
the thickening smoke which everywhere hung heavy, as 
well as by this fresh exertion in the densely compressed 
air, toiled, panting, up the steep incline. 

The engineer was already bathed in a heavy sweat. The 



DUNGEON OF THE SKELETONS333 

intense heat, well above a hundred degrees, added to the 
humidity, aJmust stifled him. His bound arms pained almost 
beyond endurance. Unable to balance himself, he slipped 
and staggered, 

"Beatrice!" he called chokingly. "Try to make them 
understand I want my hands freed. It's bad enough trying 
to clamber up this infernal road, anyhow, without having 
to go at it all trussed up this way." 

She, needing no second appeal, raised her free arms, 
pointed to her wrists and then at his, and made a gesture 
as of cutting. But the elder boatman of Stem's canoe  
seemingly a person of some authority  only shook his head 
and urged the prisoners upward, ever upward toward the 
great and growing light. 

Now they had reached the top of the ascent. 

On either hand, vanishing in shadows and mist, heavy 
and high walls extended, all built of black, cut stone surmounted by cressets. 

Through a gateway the throng passed, and the prisoners 
with them  a gateway built of two massive monoliths of 
dressed stone, octagonal and highly polished, with a huge, 
straight plinth that Stem estimated at a glance never couM 
have weighed less than ten tons, 

" Ironwork, heavy stonework, weaving, fisheries  a good 
beginning here to work on," thought the engineer. But 
there was little time for analysis. For now already they 
were passing through a complex series of inner gateways. 
passages, detours and labyrinthic defenses which  all well 
lighted from above by fire-baskets  spoke only too plainly 
the character of the enclosure within. 

"A walled town, heavily fortified," Stem realized as he 
and Beatrice were thrust forward through the last gate. 
" Evidently these people are living here in constant fear of 
attack by formidable foes. I'll wager there's been some lerrible fighting in these narrow ways  and there may he some 
more, too, before we're through with it. God, what a place ! 
Makes me think of the machicoulis and posterns at old 



f 




334 DARKNESS 'AND DAWN 

Carcassonne. So far as this is concerned, we're back again 
in the Dark Ages  daric, dark as Erebus ! " 

Then, all at once, out they issued into so strange a scene 
that, involuntarily, the two captives stopped short, staring 
about them with wide eyes. 

Stretching away before them till the fog swallowed it 
a fog now glowing with light irom some source 
still mist-hidden  an open plaza stretched. This plaza was 
all surrounded, so far as they could see, with singular huts, 
built of dressed stone, circular for the most part, and with 
conical roofs like monster beehives. Windows there were 
none, but each hut had an open door facing the source of 
the strange, blue-green light. 

Stern could now see the inside of the wall, topped with 
torches ; its crest rose some five feet above the level of the 
plaza ; and, where he could catch a glimpse of its base between the Kuts and through the crowding folk, he noticed 
that huge quantities of boulders were piled as though .for 
instant use in case of attack. 

A singular dripping of warmish water, here a huge drc, 
there another, attracted his attention ; but though he looked 
up to determine its source, if possible, he could see nothing 
except the glowing mist. The whole floor of the enclosure 
seemed to be wet and shining with this water; and all the 
roughly clad folk, now coming from the huts and concentrating toward the captives, from every direction, were wet 
as well, as though with this curious, constant, sparsely 
scattered rain. 

Not a quadruped of any kind was to be seen. Neither 
cat nor dog was there, neither goat nor pig nor any other 
creature such as in the meanest savage villages of other 
times might have been found upbn the surface of the earth. 
But, undisturbed and bold, numbers of a most extraordinary fowl  a long-legged, red-necked fowl, wattled and 
huge of beak  gravely waddled here and there or perched 
singly and in solemn rows upon the huts. 

" Great Heavens, Beatrice," exclaimed the engineer 



DUNGEON OF THE SKELETONS335 

"what are we up against? Of all the incredible plafesi 
That light I That roaring ! " 

He had difficulty in making himself even heard. For 
now the hissing roar which they had perceived from afar 
off seemed to fill the place with a tremendous vibrant blur, 
rising, falling, as the light waxed and waned. 

Terribly confusing all these new sense-impressions were 
to Stern and Beatrice in their unnerved and weakened 
state. And, staring about them as they went, they slowly 
moved along with the motion of their captors toward the 
great light. 

All at once Stern stopped, with a startled cry. 

"The infernal devils!" he exclaimed, and recoiled with 
an involuntary shudder from the sight that met his eyes. 

The girl, too, cried out in fear. 

Some air-current, some heated blast of vapor from the 
vast flame they now saw shooting upward from the stone 
flooring of the plaza, momently dispelled the thick, white 
vapors. 

Stern got a glimpse of a circular row of stone posts, each 
about nine feet high  he saw not the complete circle, but 
enough of it to judge ils diameter as some fifty feet. In 
the center stood a round and massive building, and from 
each post to that building stretched a metal rod perhaps 
twenty feet in length. 

"Look! Look!" gasped Beatrice, and pointed. 

Then, deadly pale, she hid her face in both her hands 
and crouched away, as though to blot the sight from her 
perception. 

Each metal bar was sagging with a hideous load  a row 
of human skeletons, stark, fleshless, frightful in their ghastliness. All were headless. All, suspended by the cervical 
vertebra?, swayed lightly as the blue-green light glared on 
them with its weird, unearthly radiance. 

Before either Stem or the girl had time even to struggle 
or so nuK-h as recover from the shock of this fell sight, they 



f 




336 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

were both pushed roughly between two of the posts into the 
frightful circle. 

Stern saw a door yawn black before them in the massive 
hut of stone. 

Toward this the Folk of the Abyss were thrusting them. 

"No, you don't, damn you!" he howled with sudden 
passion. " None o' that for i/ Shoot, Beta! Shoot!" 

But even as her hand jerked at the butt of the automatic, 
in its rawhide holster on her hip, an overmastering force 
flung them both forward into the foul dark of the round 
dungeon. A metal door clanged shut. Absolute darkness 
fell. 

" My God ! " cried Stem. " Beta ! Where are you ? 
Beta !B to.''' 

But answer there was none. The girl had fainted. 



CHAPTER XXVI 

" you SPEAK ENGLISH t " 

Even in his pain and rage and fear. Stern did not lose his 
whs. Too great the peril, he subconsciously realized, for 
any false step now. Despite the fact that the stone prison 
could measure no more than some ten feet in diameter, he 
knew that in its floors some pit or fissure might exist, 
frightfully deep, for their destruction. 

And other dangers, too, might lie hidden in this fearful 
place. So, restraining himself with a strong effort, he 
stood there motionless a few seconds, listening, trying to 
think. Severe now the pain from his lashed wrists had 
grown, hut he no longer felt it. Strange visions seemed to 
dance before his eyes, for weakness and fever were at 
work upon him. In his ears stiil sounded, though muffled 
now. the constant hissing roar of the great flame, the mysterious and monstrous jet of fire which seemed to form the 
center of this unknown, incomprehensible life in the ahyss,' 

"Merciful Heavens!" gasped he. "That fire  those 
skeletons this black cell  what can they mean?" He 
found no answer in his bewildered brain. Once more he 
called, " Beatrice! Beatrice!" but only the close echo of 
the prison replied. 

He listened, holding his breath in sickening fear. Was 
there, in truth, some waiting, yawning chasm in the cell, 
and had she, thrust rudely forward, been hurled down it? 
At the thought he set his jaws with terrible menace and 
swore, to the last drop of his blood, vengeance on these 
inhuman captors. 

337 



i 




338 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

But as he listened, standing there with bound hands in the 
thick gloom, he seemed to catch a slow and sighing sound, 
as of troubled breathing. Again he called. No answer. 
Then he understood the truth. And, unable to grope with 
his hands, he swung one foot slowly, gently, in the partial 
circumference of a circle. 

At first he found nothing save the smooth and slippery 
stone of the floor, but, having shifted his position very 
cautiously and tried again, he experienced the great joy of 
feeling his sandaled foot come in contact with the girl's 
prostrate body. 

Beside her on the floor he knelt. He could not free his 
hands, but he could call to her and kiss her face. And 
presently, even while the joy of this discovery was keen 
upon him, obscuring the hot rage he felt, she moved, she 
spoke a few vague words, and reached her hands up to 
him ; she clasped him in her arms. 

And there in the close, fetid dark, imprisoned, helpless, 
doomed, they kissed again, and once more  though no word 
was spoken  plighted their love and deep fidelity until the 
end. 

"Hurt? Are you hurt?" he panted eagerly, as she sat 
up on the hard floor and with her hands smoothed back 
the hair from his hot, aching head. 

" I feel so weak and dizzy," she answered. " And I'm 
afraid  oh, Allan, I'm afraid! But, no, I'm not hurt" 

" Thank God for that ! " he breathed fervently. " Can 
you untie these infernal knots ? They're almost cutting my 
hands off ! " 

" Here, let me try ! " 

And presently the girl set to work; but even though 
she labored till her fingers ached, she could not start the 
tight and water-soaked ligatures. 

" Hold on, wait a minute," directed he. " Feel in my 
right-hand pocket. Maybe they forgot to take my knife. 

She obeyed. 

" They've got it," she announced. " Even if they don't 



"YOU SPEAK ENGLISH!' 339 

know the meaning of revolvers, they understand knives all 
right. It's gone." 

" Pest ! " he ejaculated hotly. Then for a moment he 
sat thinking, while the girl again tried vainly to loosen the 
hard-drawn knots. 

" Can you find the iron door they shoved us through ? " 
asked he at length. 

"Til see!" 

He heard her creeping cautiously along the walls of stone, 
feeling as she went. 

" Look out ! " he warned. " Keep testing the floor as 
you go. There may be a crevice or pit or something of 
that kind." 

All at once she cried : " Here it is ! I've found it ! " 

" Good ! Now, then, feel it all over and see if there's any 
rough place on it. Any sharp edge of a plate, or anything of that kind, that I could rub the cords on." 

Another silence. Then the girl spoke. 

" Nothing of that kind here," she answered depairingly. 
" The door's as smooth as if it had been filed and polished. 
There's not even a lock of any kind. It must be fastened 
from the outside in some way." 

" By Heaven, this is certainly a hard proposition!" exclaimed the engineer, groaning despite himself. " What the 
deuce are we going to do nowf ' 

For a moment he remained sunk in a kind of dull and 
apathetic respair. 

But suddenly he gave a cry of joy. 

"I've got it!" he exclaimed. "Your revolver, quick! 
Aim at the opposite wall, there, and fire!" 

" Shoot, in here ? " she queried, astonished. " Why  
what for?" 

" Never mind I Shoot ! " 

Amazed, she did his bidding. The crash of the report 
almost deafened them in that narrow room. By the stabbing flare of the discharge they glimpsed the black and 
shining walls, a deadly circle all about them. 




340 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" Again ? " asked she. 

" No. That's enough. Now, find the bullet. It's somewhere on the floor. There's no pit; it's all solid. The 
bullet find the bullet I " 

Questioning no more, yet still not understanding, she 
groped on hands and knees in the impenetrable blackness. 
The search lasted more than five minutes before her hand 
fell on the jagged bit of metal. 

" Ah ! " cried she. " Here it is ! "  

"Good! Tell me, is the steel jacket burst in any such 
way as to make a jagged edge?" 

A moment's silence, while her deft fingers examined the 
metal. Then said she: 

" I think so. It's a terribly small bit to saw with, but  " 

 To work, then ! I can't stand this much longer." 

With splendid energy the girl attacked the tough and 
water-soaked bonds. She worked half an hour before the 
first one, thread by thread yielding, gave way. The second 
followed soon after; and now, with torn and bleeding 
fingers, she released the final bond. 

" Thank Heaven ! " he breathed as she began chafing his 
numb wrists and arms to bring the circulation back again; 
and presently, when he had regained some use of his own 
hands, he also rubbed his arms. 

" No great damage done, after all," he judged, " so far 
as this is concerned. But, by the Almighty, we're in one 
frightful fix every other way ! Hark ! Hear those demons 
outside there? God knows what they're up to now!" 

Both prisoners listened. 

Even through the massive walls of the circular dungeon 
they could hear a dull and gruesome chant that rose, fell, 
died, and then resumed, seemingly in unison with the variant roaring of the flame. 

Thereto, also, an irregular metallic sound, as of blows 
struck on iron, and now and then a shrill, high-pitched cry. 
The effect of these strange sounds, rendered vague and 
unreal by the density of the walls, and faintly penetrating 




"YOU SPEAK ENGLISH!'' 341 

the dreadful darkness, surpassed all efforts of the imagination. 

Beatrice and Stem, bold as they were, hardened to rough 
adventurings, felt their hearts sink with bodings, and for 
a while they spoke no word. They sat there together on 
the floor of polished stone  perceptibly warm to the touch 
and greasy with a peculiarly repellent substance  and 
thought long thoughts which neither one dared voice. 

But at length the engineer, now much recovered from his 
pain and from the oppression of the' lungs caused by the 
compressed air, reached for the girl's hand in the dark. 

" Without you where should I be ? " he exclaimed. " My 
good angel now, as always ! " 

She made no answer, but returned the pressure of his 
hand. And for a while silence fell between them there  
silence broken only by their trouttled breathing and the 
cadenced roaring of the huge gas-well flame outside the 
prison wall. 

At last Stern spoke. 

" Let's get some better idea of this place," said he. " Maybe if we know just what we're up against we'll understand 
better what to do." 

And slowly, cautiously, with every sense alert, he b;an 
exploring the dungeon. Floor and walls he felt of, with 
minute care, reaching as high as he could and eagerly seeking some possible crevice, some promise  no matter how 
remote  of ultimate escape. 

But the examination ended only in discouragement. 
Smooth almost as glass the walls were, and the floor as 
well, perhaps worn down by countless prisoners. 

The iron door, cleverly let into the wall, lay flush with 
it, and offered not the slightest irregularity to the touch. 
So nicely was it fitted that not even Stem's finger-nail could 
penetrate the joint. 

" Nothing doing in the escape line," he passed judgment 
unwillingly. " Barbarians these people certainly are, in 
some ways, but they've got the arts of stone and iron 




342 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

working down fine. I, as an engineer, have to appreciate 
that, and give the remote descendants of our race credit 
for it, even if it works our ruin. Gad, but they're clever, 
though ! " 

Discouraged, in spite of all his attempted optimism, he 
sought the girl again, there in the deep and velvet dark. To 
himself he drew her; and, his arm about her sinuous, supple body, tried to comfort her with cheering speech. 

" Well, Beatrice, they haven't got us yet! We're better 
off, on the whole, than we had any right to hope for, after 
having fallen one or two hundred miles  maybe five hundred, who knows ? If I can manage to get a word or two 
with these confounded barbarians, I'll maybe save our 
bacon yet! And, at worst  well, we're in a mighty good 
little fort here. I pity anybody that tries to come in that 
door and get us." 

" Oh, Allan  those skeletons, those headless skeletons ! " 
she whispered; and in his arms he felt her shudder with 
unconquerable fear. 

" I know ; but they aren't going to add us to their little 
collection, you mark my words! These men are white; 
they're our own kind, even though they have slid back 
into barbarism. They'll listen to reason, once I get a 
chance at them." 

Thus, talking of the abyss and of their fall  now of one 
phase, now another, of their frightful position  they passed 
an hour in the stifling dark. 

And, joining their observations and ideas, they were able 
to get some general idea of the conditions under which these 
incredible folk were dwelling. 

From the warmth of the sea and the immense quantities 
of vapor that filled the abyss, they concluded that it must 
be at a tremendous depth in the earth  perhaps as far 
down as Stem's extreme guess of five hundred miles  and 
also that it must be of very large extent. 

Beatrice had noted also that the water was salt. This 
led them to the conclusion that in some way or other, pcr 




"YOU SPEAK ENGLISH!'' 343 

haps intermittently, the oceans on the surface were supplying the subterranean sea. 

"If I'm not much mistaken," judged the engineer, "that 
tremendous maelstrom near the site of New Haven  the 
cataract that almost got us, just after we started out  has 
something very vital to do with this situation. 

" In that case, and if there's a way for water to come 
down, why mayn't there be a way for us to climb upf Who 
knows ? " 

" But if there were," she answered, " wouldn't these 
people have found it, in all these hundreds and hundreds of 
years ? " 

They discussed the question, pro and con, with many 
another that bore on the folk  this strange and inexplicable 
imprisonment, the huge flame at the center of the community's life, the probable intentions of their captors, and the 
terrifying rows of headless skeletons. 

" What those mean I don't know," said Stem. " There 
may be human sacrifice here, and offerings of blood to 
some outlandish god they've invented. Or these relics may 
be trophies of battle with other peoples of the abyss. 

" To judge from the way this place is fortified, I rather 
think there must be other tribes, with more or less constant 
warfare. The infernal fools ! When the human race is all 
destroyed, as it is, except a few handfuls of albino survivors, to make war and kill each other! It's on a par with 
the old Maoris of New Zealand, who practically exterminated each other  fought till most of the tribes were wiped 
clean out and only a remnant was left for the British to 
subdue ! " 

" I'm more interested in what they're going to do with 
us now," she answered, shuddering, "than in how many 
or how few survive! IVhat are we going to do, Allan f 
IV hat on earth can we do now?" 

He thought a moment, while the strangle chant, dimly 
heard, rose and fell outside, always in unison with the 
gigantic flame. Then said he: 



I 




344 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

''Do? Nothing, for the immediate present. Nothing, 
except wait, and keep all the nerve and strength we can. 
No use in our shputing and making a row. They'd only 
take that as an admission of fear and weakness, just as 
any barbarians would. No use hammering on the iron door 
with our revolver-butts, and annoying our white brothers 
by interrupting their song services. 

" Positively the only thing I can see to do is just to 
make sure both automatics are crammed full of cartridges, 
keep our wits about us, and plug the first man that comes 
in through that door with the notion of making sacrifices 
of us. I certainly don't hanker after martyrdom of that 
sort, and, by God ! the savage that lays hands on you, dies 
inside of one second by the stop-watch ! " 

" I know, boy ; but against so many, what are two revolvers ? " 

"They're everything! My guess is that a little taiget 
practise would put the fear of God into their hearts in a 
most extraordinary manner ! " 

He tried to speak lightly and to cheer the girl, but in 
his breast his heart lay heavy as a lump of lead. 

"Suppose they don't come in, what then?" suddenly 
resumed Beatrice. " What if they leave us here till  " 

" There, there, little girl ! Don't you go borrowing any 
trouble! We've got enough of the real article, without 
manufacturing any!" 

Silence again, and a long, dark, interminable waiting. 
In the black cell the air grew close and frightfuly oppressive. Clad as they both were in fur garments suitable 
to outdoor life and to aeroplaning at great altitudes, they 
were suffering intensely from the heat. 

Stern's wrists and arms, moreover, still pained considerably, for they had been very cruelly bruised with the ropes, 
which the barbarians had drawn tight with a force that 
bespoke both skill and deftness. His need of some occupation forced him to assure himself, a dozen times over, 
that both revolvers were completely filled. Fortunately, the 



YOU SPEAK ENGLISH! 



345 



captors had not known enough to rob either Beatrice or 
him of the cartridge-belts they wore. 

How long a time passed? One hourtwo, three? 

They could not tell. 

But, overcome by the vitiated air and the great heat, 
Beatrice slept at last, her head in the man's lap. He, utterly spent, leaned his back against the wall of black and polished stone, nodding with weariness and great exhaustion. 

He, too, must have dropped off into a troubled sleep, 
for he did not hear the unbolting of the massive iron celldoor. 

But all at once, with a quick start, he recovered consciousness. He found himself broad awake, with the girl 
clutching at his arm and pointing. 

With dazzled eyes he stared  stared at a strange figure 
standing framed in a rectangle of blue and foggy light. 

Even as he shouted: " Hold on, there! Get back out 
o' that, you ! " and jerked his ugly pistol at the old man's 
breast  for very aged this man seemed, bent and feeble 
and trembling as he leaned upon an iron staff  a voice 
spoke dully through the half-gloom, saying: 

"Peace, friends! Peace be unto you!" 

Stern started up in wild amaze. 

From his nen'CJess fingers the pistol dropped. And, as 
it clattered on the floor, he cried: 

"English? You speak English? Who are you? English! English! Oh, my God!" 



/ 




CHAPTER XXVII 

doomed! 

The aged man stood for a moment as though tranced at 
sound of the engineer's voice. Then, tapping feebly with 
his staff, he advanced a pace or two into the dtmgeon. 
And Stern and Beatrice  who now had sprung up, too, 
and was likewise staring at this singular apparition  
heard once again the words: 

" Peace, friends I Peace ! " 

Stern snatched up the revolver and leveled it. 

" Stop there ! " he shouted. " Another step and I  I  '' 

The old man hesitated, one hand holding the 
staff, the other groping out vacantly in front of him, as 
though to touch the prisoners. Behind him, the dull blue 
light cast its vague glow. Stem, seeing his bald and shaking head, lean, corded hand, and trembling body wrapped 
in its mantle of coarse brown stuff, could not finish the 
threat. 

Instead, his pistol-hand dropped. He stood there for a 
moment as though paralyzed with utter astonishment. Outside, the chant had ceased. Through the doorway no living 
beings were visible  nothing but a thin and tenuous vapor, 
radiant in the gas-flare which droned its never-ending roar. 

" In the name of Heaven, who  what  are you?" cried 
the engineer, at length. "A man who speaks English, 
heref Here?" 

The aged one nodded slowly, and once again groped out 
toward Stem. 

Then, in his strangely hollow voice, unreal and ghostly, 

346 



DOOMED ! 

and with uncertain hesitation, an accent that rendered the 
words all but unintelligible, he made answer: 

"A man yea, a living man. Not a ghost. A manl 
and I speak the English. Verily, I am ancient. Blind, I 
go unto my fathers soon. But not until I have had speech 
with you. Oh, this miracle  English speech with those 
to whom it still be a living tong;uc ! " 

He choked, and for a space could say no more. He 
trembled violently. Stern saw his frail body shake, heard 
sobs, and knew the ancient one was weeping. 

"Well, great Scott! What d'you think of thatr' exclaimed the engineer. "Say, Beatrice  am I dreaming? 
Do you see it. too ? " 

"Of course! He's a survivor, don't you understand?" 
she answered, with quicker intuition than his. " He's one 
of an elder generation  he remembers more! Perhaps he 
can help us! " she added eagerly. And without more ado, 
running to the old man, she seized his hand and pressed it 
to her bosom. 

"Oh, father! " cried she. "We are Americans in terrible distress ! You understand us  you, alone, of all these 
people here. Save us, if you canl" 

The patriarch shook his head, where still some sparse and 
feeble hairs clung, snowy-white. 

"Alas!" he answered, intelligibly, yet still with that 
strange, hesitant accent of his" alas, what can I do? I 
am sent to you, verily, on a different mission. They do 
not understand, my people. They have forgotten all. They 
have fallen back into the night of ignorance. I alone remember; I only know. They mock me. But they fear 
me, also. 

"Oh, woman!"  and, dropping his staff a-clatter to 
the floor, he stretched out a quivering hand  " oh, woman 1 
and oh, man from above speak I Speak, that I may hear 
the English from living lips!'" 

Stem, blinking with astonishment there in the half-gloom, 
drew near. 




348 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

"English?" h queried. "Haven't you ever heard it 

spoken ? " 

" Never ! Yet, all my life, here in this lost place, have I 
studied and dreamed of that ancient tongue. Our race 
once spoke it. Now it is lost. That magnificent language, 
so rich and pure, all lost, forever lost I And we  " 

" But what do you speak down here ? " exclaimed the 
engineer, with eager interest. " It seemed to me I could 
almost catch something of it; but when it came down to 
the real meaning, I couldn't. If we could only talk with 
these people here, your people, they might give us some 
kind of a show I Tell me ! " 

" A  a show ? " queried the blind man, shaking his head 
and laying his other hand on Stern's shoulder. " Verily, I 
cannot comprehend. An entertainment, you mean? Alas, 
no, friends; they are not hospitable, my people. I fear 
me ; I fear me greatly that  that  " 

He did not finish, but stood there blinking his sightless 
eyes, as though with some vast effort of the will he might 
gain knowledge of their features. Then, very deftly, he 
ran his fingers over Stem's bearded face. Upon the engineer's lips his digits paused a second. 

" Living English ! " he breathed in an awed voice. " These 
lips speak it as a living language ! Oh, tell me, friends, are 
there now men of your race once our race  still living, 
up yonder? Is there such a place  is there a sky, a sun, 
moon, stars  verily such things now? Or is this all, as 
my people say, deriding me, only the babbling of old wives' 
tales?" 

A thousand swift, conflicting thoughts seemed struggling 
in Stern's mind. Here, there, he seemed to catch a lucid 
bit ; but for the moment he could analyze nothing of these 
swarming impressions. 

He seemed to see in this strange ancient-of-days some 
last and lingering relic of a former generation of the Folk 
of the Abyss, a relic to whom perhaps had been handed 
down, through countless generations, some vague and wildly 



DOOMED! 349 

distorted traditions of the days before the cataclyara. A 
relic who stiil remembered a little English, archaic, formal, 
mispronounced, but who, with the tenacious memory of 
the very aged, still treasured a few hundred words of what 
to him was but a dead and forgotten tongue, A relic, still 
longing for knowledge of the outer world  still striving 
to keep alive in the degenerated people some spark of 
memory of all that once had been! 

And as this realization, not yet very clear, but seemingly certain in its general form, dawned on the engineer, a 
sudden interest in the problem and the tragedy of it all 
sprang up in him. so keen, so poignant in its appeal to his 
scientific sense, that for a moment it quite banished his 
distress and his desire for escape with Beatrice. 

" Why, girl," he cried,' " here's a case parallel, in real 
life, to the wildest imaginings of fiction I It's as though a 
couple of ancient Romans had walked in upon some old archeologist who'd given his life to studying primitive Latin! 
Only you'd have to imagine he was the only man in the 
world who remembered a word of Latin at all! Can you 
grasp it? No wonder he's overcome 1 

"Gad! If we work this right," he added in a swift 
aside, "this will be good for a return ticket, all right!" 

The old mnn withdrew his hand from the grasp of Beatrice and folded both arms across his breast with simple 
dignity, 

" I rejoice that I have lived to this time." he stammered 
slowly, gropingly, as though each word, each distorted and 
mispronounced syllable had to be sought with difficulty. 
" I am glad that I have lived to touch you and to hear your 
voices. To know it is no mere tradition, but that, verily, 
there was such a race and such a language! The rest. 
also, must be true  the earth, and the aun, and everything! 
Oh, this is a wonder and a miracle! Now I can die in a 
great peace, and they will know I have spoken truth to 
their mocking!" 

He kept silence a space, and the two captives looked 




u 
It 



350 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

fixedly at him, strangely moved. On his withered cheeks 
they could see, by the dull bluish glow through the doorway, 
tears still wet. The long and venerable beard of spotless 
white trembled as it fell freely over the coarse mantle. 

' What a subject for a painter  if there were any painters 
left ! " thought Stern. 

The old man's lips moved again. 

" Now I can go in peace to my appointed place in the 
Great Vortex/' said he, and bowed his head, and whispered something in that other speech they had already heard 
but could not understand. 

Stem spoke first. 
What shall we call your name, father?" asked he. 
Call me J'hungaav," he answered, pronouncing a name 
which neither of them could correctly imitate. When they 
had tried he asked: 

"And yours?" 

Stern gave both the girl's and his own. The old man 
caught them both readily enough, though with a very different accent. 

" Now, see here, father," the engineer resumed, " you'll 
pardon us, I know. There's a million things to talk about. 
A million we want to ask, and that we can tell you! But 
we're very tired. We're hungry. Thirsty. Understand? 
We've just been through a terrible experience. You can't 
grasp it yet ; but I'll tell you we've fallen, God knows how 
far, in an aeroplane  " 

" Fallen ? In an an " 

" No matter. We've fallen from the surface. From the 
world where there's a sky, and sun, and stars, and aU 
the rest of it. So far as we know, this woman and I are 
the only two people  the original kind of people, I mean; 
the people of the time before er  hang it!  it's mighty 
hard to explain ! " 

" I understand. You are the only two now living of our 
former race? And you have come from above? Verily, 
this is strange!" 




DOOMED! 351 

"' You bet it is ! I mean, verily. Andi now we're here 
your people have thrown us into this prison, or whatever k 
is. And we don't like the look of those skdetoos on tte iroQ 
rods outside a little bit! We" 

" Oh, I pray I I pray ! " exclaimed the patriarch, thrusting out both hands. " Speak not of those I Not yet I " 

'' All right, father. What we want to ask is tor something to eat and drink, some other kind of clothes tfaaa the 
furs we're wearing, and a place to sleep a house, you 
know  we've got to rest! We mean no harm to your 
people. Wouldn't hurt a hair of their heads! Overjoyed 
to find 'em! Now, I ask you, as man to man, can't you 
get us out of this, and manage things so that we shall have 
a chance to explain? 

" I'll give you the whole story, once we've recuperated. 
You can translate it to your people. I ask some consideration for myself, and I demand it for this woman! Well? 

The old man stood in silent thought a moment. Plain 
to see, his distress was very keen. His face wrinkled still 
more, and on his breast he bowed his majestic head, so 
eloquent of pain and sorrow and IcHig disappointment. 

Stern, watching him narrowly, played his trump-card. 

" Father," said he, " I don't know why you were tent 
here to talk with us, or how they knew you could talk 
with us even. I don't know what any of this treatment 
means. But I do know that this girl and I are from the 
world of a thousand years ago  the world in which your 
ancient forefathers used to dwell! 

'' She and I know all about that world. We know the 
language which to you is only a precious memory, to us a 
living fact. We can tell you hundreds, thousands of things I 
We can teach you everything you want to knowj For a 
year  if you people have years down here  wc can sh and 
talk to you, and instruct you, and make you far, far wisor 
than any of your Folk ! 

" More, we can teach your Folk the arts of peace and war 
 a multitude of wonderful and useful tilings. We can 




352 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

raise them from barbarism to civilization again! We can 
save them  save the world! And I appeal to you, in the 
name of all the great and mighty past which to you is still 
a memory, if not to them  save us now I ' 

He ceased. The old man sighed deeply, and for a while 
kept silence. His face might have served as the living 
personification of intense and hopeless wo. 

Stern had an idea. 

" Father," he added  '' here, take this weapon in your 
hand ! " He thrust the automatic into the patriarch's fingers. " This is a revolver. Have you ever heard that 
word? With this, and other weapons even stronger, our 
race, your race, used to fight. It can kill men at a distance 
in a twinkling of an eye. It is swift and very powerful! 
Let this be the proof that we are what we say, survivors 
from the time that was! And in the name of that great 
day, and in the name of what we still can bring to pass 
for you and yours, save us from whatever evil threatens ! " 

A moment the old man held the revolver. Then, shud 
dering as with a sudden chill, he thrust it back at Stem. 

" Alas ! " cried he. " What am I against a thousand? A 
thousand, sunk in ignorance and fear and hate? A thou 
sand who mock at me? Who believe you, verily, to be 
only some new and stronger kind of Lanskaam, as we 
call our ancient enemies on the great islands in the sea. 

"What can I do? They have let me have speech with 
you merely because they think me so old and so childish ! 
Because they say my brain is soft! Whatever I may tell 
them, they will only mock. Wo upon me that I have known 
this hour! That I have heard this ancient tongue, only 
now forever to lose it! That I know the truth! That I 
know the world of old tradition was true and is true, only 
now to have no more, after this moment, any hope ever to 
learn about it ! ' 

" The devil you say ! " cried Stem, with sudden anger. 
" You mean they won't listen to reason ? You mean they're 
planning to butcher us, and hang us up there along with 




DOOMED! 3S3 

the rest of the captured Lanskaarns, or whatever yoa call 
them? You mean they're going to take u tu; tiie oafy 
chance they've got ever to get out of this and stick us 
like a couple of pigs, eh ? Well, by God I You tdi fheo 
you tell" 

In the doorway appeared another form, armed with an 
iron spear. Came a quick word of command. 

With a cry of utter hopelessness and heartbreak, a wail 
that seemed to pierce the very soul, the patriarch turned 
and stumbled to the door. 

He paused. He turned, and, stretchii out both fecbfo 
arms to them  to them, who meant so infinitdy much Ito 
him, so absolutely nothing to his barbarous race cried: 

'' Fare you well, O godlike people of that better time i 
Fare you well! Before another tide has risen on our accursed black beach, verily both of you, the last survivors   

With a harsh word of anger, the spearsman thrust liim 
back and away. 

Stem leaped forward, revolver leveled. 

But before he could pull trigger the inm door had clanged 
shut. 

Once more darkness swallowed them. 

Black though it was, it equaled not the blackness of dieir 
absolute despair. 



I 







CHAPTER XXVIII 

THE BATTLE IN THE DARK 

For a time no word passed between them. Stern took the 
girl in his arms and comforted her as best he might; but 
his heart told him there was now no hope. 

The old man had spoken only too truly. There existed 
no way of convincing these barbarians that their prisoners 
were not of some hated, hostile tribe. Evidently the tradition of the outer world had long since perished as a belief 
among them. The patriarch's faith in it had come to be 
considered a mere doting second childhood vagary, just 
as the tradition of the Golden Age was held to be by the 
later Greeks. 

That Stem and Beatrice could in any way convince 
their captors of the truth of this outer world and establish 
their identity as real survivors of the other time, lay wholly 
outside the bounds of the probable. 

And as the old man's prophecy of evil  interrupted, yet 
frightfully ominous  recurred to Stern's mind, he knew the 
end of everything was very close at hand. 

" They won't get us, though, without a stiff fight, damn 
them ! " thought he. " That's one satisfaction. If they 
insist on extermination  if they want war  they'll get it, 
all right enough! And it'll be what Sherman said war 
always was, too Hell!" 

Came now a long, a seemingly interminable wait. The 
door remained fast-barred. Oppression, heat, thirst, hunger tortured them, but relief there was none. 

And at length the merciful sleep of stupefaction ovcr
354 



THE BATTLE IN THE DARK 355 

came them ; and all their pain, their anguish and forebodings 
were numbed into a welcome oblivion. 

They were awakened by a confused noise  the sound 
of cries and shouts, dulled by the thick walls, yet evidently 
many-voiced  harsh commands, yells, and even some few 
sharp blows upon the prison stones. 

The enneer started up, wide-eyed and all alert now 
in the gloom. 

Gone were his lassitude, his weakness and his sense of 
pain. Every sense acute, he waited, hand clutching the 
pistol-butt, finger on trigger, 

" Ready there, Beatrice ! " cried he. " Something's started 
at last I Maybe it's our turn now. Here, get behind me  
but be ready to shoot when I tell you! Steady now, 
steady for the attack t " 

Tense as coiled springs they waited. And all at once a 
bar slid, creaking. Around the edge of the metal door 
a thin blue line of light appeared, 

"Stand back, you.'" yelled Stern. "The first man 
through thai door's a dead one!" 

The line of light remained a moment narrow; then suddenly it broadened. From without a pandemonium of sound 
burst in  howls, shrieks, imprecations, cries of pain. 

Even in that perilous moment a (juick wonder darted 
through Stem's brain, what the meaning of this infernal 
tumult might be, and just what ghastly fate was to be 
theirs  what torments and indignities they might still have 
to face hcfore the end. 

"Remember, Beatrice," he commanded, "if I'm killed, 
use the revolver on yourself before you let them take you ! " 

"I know!" she cried. And, crouching beside him in 
the half light, she, too, awaited what seemed the inevitable. 

The door swung of>en. 

There stood the patriarch again, arms extended, face 
eager with a passionate hope and longing, a great pride 
even at that strange and pregnant moment. 

" Peace, friends I " he cried. " I give you peace I Strike 



i 




356 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

me not down with those terrible weapons of yours! For 
verily I bring you hope again ! " 

" Hope ? What dyou mean ? " shouted Stern. 

Through the opened door he caught vague glimpses in 
the liuninous fog of many spearmen gathered near of excited gestures and the wild waving of arms  of other figures that, half seen, ran swiftly here and there. 

" Speak up, you ! What's the matter ? What's wanted ? " 
demanded the engineer, keeping his automatic sighted at the 
doorway. "What's all this infernal row? If your people 
there think they're going to play horse with us, they're 
mightily mistaken ! You tell them the first man that steps 
through that door to get us never'U take another step! 
Quick! What's up? '' 

 Come ! " answered the aged man, his voice high and 
tremulous above the howling tumult and the roar of the 
great gas-well. " Come, now ! The Lanskaam  they attack! Come! I have spoken of your weapons to my people. Come, fight for us! And verily, if we win   

" What kind of a trick are you putting up on us, anyhow ? " roared Stern with thrice-heated rage. " None o' 
that now! If your people want us, let 'em come in here 
and get us ! But as for being fooled that way and tricked 
into coming out  " 

" I swear the truth ! " supplicated the patriarch, raising 
his withered hand on high. " If you come not, you must 
verily die, oh, friends! But if you come  " 

" Your own life's the first to pay for any falsehood now." 

"I give it gladly! The truth, I swear it! Oh, listen, 
while there is still time, and come! Come!" 

 What about it, girl? " cried Stem. "Are you with me? 
Will you take a chance on it?" 

" There's nothing else to do, Allan. They've got us, 
anyway. And  and I think the old man's telling the truth. 
Hear that, now  " 

Off somewhere toward the fortification wall that edged 




THE BATTLE IN THE DARK 357 

the beach, sounds of indisputable conflict were arising. The 
howls, cries, shrieks, blows were not to be mistaken. 

Stem's resolution was instant. 

" Fm with you, old man ! " he shouted. " But remember 
your promise. And if you fail me  it's your finish I 

"Come, Beta! Stick close to me! If we fall, we'll go 
down together. It's both or neither. Come on  come on! " 

Out into the glare of the great flame they issued warily, 
out into the strangely glowing mist that covered the incredible village as with a virescent pall. 

Blinking, they stared about them, not knowing for a 
moment whither to run or where to shoot 

But the patriarch had Stem by the arm now; and in 
the midst of a confused and shouting mass of the Folk  
all armed with spears and slings, knobbed clubs and battlemaces  was pushing him out through the circle of those 
ghastly posts whence dangled the headless skeletons. 

" Where? Which way ? " cried Stem. " Show me I'll 
do the rest!" 

" Thither ! " the old man directed, pointing with one 
hand, while with the other he shoved the engineer forward. 
Blind though he was, he knew the right direction. ' Thither 
to the wall!" 

For a second Stern had the thought of leaving Beatrice 
in the cell, where she might at least be safe from the keen 
peril of battle ; but greater dangers threatened her, he knew, 
in his absence. 

At all hazards they must keep together. And with a 
cry : " Come ! Come  stick close to me ! " once more he 
broke into a run toward the sea. 

Through the mists, which grew darker as he neared the 
wall with Beatrice close beside him and the troop that followed them, he could catch glimpses of the battle. 

Every hut seemed to have poured forth its inhabitants, 
for now the plaza swarmed with life  men, women, even 
children, running this way and that, some with weapons 



t 




3S8 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

rushing towards the wall, others running wildly hither and 
yon with unintelligible cries. 

A spear pierced the vapors; it fell clashing at Stem's 
feet and slid rattling away over the black stones, worn 
smooth and greasy by uncounted feet. 

Past him as he ran a man staggered ; the whole side of 
his head was bashed in, as though by a frightful blow from 
a mace. Up the wounded man flung both arms, and fell 
twitching. 

The fog covered him with its drifting folds. Stem 
shuddered that Beatrice should see such hideous sights; 
but even now he almost fell over another prostrate body, 
hideously wounded in the back, and still kicking. 

 Ready, now ! " panted Stem. " Ready with the pistols! " 

Where was the patriarch? 

He no longer knew. About him the Folk pressed, but 
none molested either him or Beatrice. 

In the confusion, the rush of the outskirts of battle, he 
could have shot down a score of them, but he was reserving 
his fire. It might, perhaps, be true, who could tell  that 
safety lay in battling now against the Lanskaam 1 

All at once the captives saw vague fire-lights in the gloom 
 seemingly blazing comets of blue, that tossed and hurled 
and disappeared. 

Then came the nearer sound of shouting and the clash of 
arms. 

Stern, with the atavistic instincts of even the most civilized man, scented the kill. And with a roar he whirled into 
the confused and sweltering mass of men which now, emerging from the darkening mists, had suddenly become visible 
by the uncanny light of the cressets on the wall. 

Beside him the girl, her face aglow, nostrils dilated, breath 
quick, held her revolver ready. 

And then, quite suddenly, they found themselves at the 
wall. 

" Shoot ! Shoot I " bellowed Stern, and let drive, pointblank, at an ugly, grinning face that like a nightmare-vision 




THE BATTLE IN THE DARK 359 

all at once projected over the crest. His own revolverfire was echoed by hers. The face vanished. 

All down there, below him on the beach, he caught a 
dim, confused impression of the attacking swarm. 

Subconsciously he realized that he  he a man of the 
twentieth century  was witnessing again a scene such as 
made the whole history of the Middle Ages sanguinary  
a siege, by force of human strength and rage! 

Even as he vaguely saw the swift and supple men, whiteskinned yet larger than the Folk, which crowded the whole 
beach as far as he could pierce the mists with his straining 
sight, he knew that here was a battle of huge scope and 
terrible danger. 

Up from the sea the attackers, the Lanskaam, were 
swarming, from their dimly seen canoes. The place was 
alive with them. 

At the base of the wall they were clotted in dense hordes ; 
and siege-ladders were being raised ; and now up the ladders 
the lithe men of darkness were running like so many ants. 

Automatically as the mechanism of his own gun which 
he pumped into that dense mass as fast as he could pull 
trigger  while beside him the girl was shooting hard and 
straight, as well  he seemed to be recording these wonderful impressions. 

Here he caught a glimpse of a siege-ladder hurled backward by the Folk, backward and down to the beach. Amid 
frightful yells and screams it fell; and a score of crushed 
and mangled men lay writhing there under the uncanny 
glare of the cressets. 

There he saw fire-bales being hurled down from the 
walls  these, the comet-like apparitions he had seen from 
a distance  hurled, blazing, .right into the brown of the 
mob. 

Beyond, a party had scaled the wall, and there the fight 
was hand to hand  with gruntings, thrustings of q)ears, 
slashings of long knives that dripped red and cut agata 
and rose and fell with hideous rlarityl 



9 




36o DARKNESS AND DAWN 

He jacked his pistol full of shells once more and thrust 
it into the girl's hand  for she, excited beyond all control, 
was snapping the hammer of her weapon on empty steel. 

" Give it to 'em ! Shoot! Kill! " he yelled. "Our only 
chance now ! If they  get in  we're dead ! " 

He snatched her weapon, reloaded, and again rained the 
steel- jacketed bolts of death against the attackers. 

In the tumult and wild maelstrom of the fight the revolvers' crackling seemed to produce little effect. If Stern 
expected that this unknown weapon would at once bring 
panic and quick victory he reckoned without the berserker 
madness and the stern mettle of this horde of raging 
Lanskaarn. 

White men, like himself, they yielded not; but with 
strange cries and frightful yells, pressed on and on, up to 
the walls, and up the ladders ever; and now came flights 
of spears, hissing through the dark air  and now smooth 
black rocks from the beach, flung with terrible strength and 
skill by the slingers below, mowed down the defenders. 

Here, there, men of the Folk were falling, pierced by 
the iron spears, shattered by the swift and heavy rocks. 

The place was becoming a shambles where the blood of 
attackers and attacked mingled horribly in the gloom. 

One ladder, pushed outward, dragged half a dozen of the 
Merucaans with it ; and at the bottom of the wall a circling 
eddy of the Lanskaarn despatched the fighting Folkmen 
who had been hauled to their destruction by the grappling 
besiegers. 

Blows, howls and screams, hurtling fire-bales and geat 
rocks flung from above  the rocks he had already noted 
laid along the inside of the wall  these, and the smell of 
blood and fire, the horrid, sweaty contact of struggling 
bodies, the press and jam of the battle that surged round 
them, all gave Stern a kaleidoscopic picture of war  war 
as it once was, in the long ago war, naked and terrible, 
such as he had never even dreamed! 

But, mad with the lust of the kill, he heeded nothing now. 

" Shoot ! Shoot ! " he kept howling, beside himself ; and, 



THE BATTLE IN THE DARK 361 

tearing open the bandoliers where lay his cartridges, he 
crammed them with feverish fingers into the girl's weapon 
and his own  weapons now bLiming hot with the quick, 
long-tontinued firing. 

The battle seemed to dance, to waver there before his 
eyes, in the haze of mist and smoke and stifling air. The 
dark scene, blue-lit by the guttering torches, grew ever 
more sanguinary, more incredibly hideous. And still the 
attackers swanned along the walls and up them, in from 
and on both sides, till the swirhng mists hid them and 
the defenders from view. 

He heard Beatrice cry out with pain. He saw her stagger and fall back. 

To her he leaped. 

" Wounded ? " he gasped. 

She answered nothing, but fell limp. 

" God of Battles ! " he howled, " Revenge ! " 

He snatched her automatic from beneath the trampling, 
crowding feet ; he bore her back, away from the thick press. 
And in the shelter of a massive hut he laid her down. 

Then, stark-mad, he turned and leaped into the battleline that swayed and screamed along the wall. 

Critical now the moment. In half a dozen places the 
besiegers had got their ladders planted. And, while dense 
masses of the Lanskaam  unminding fire-balls and boulders 
rained down upon them  held these ladders firm, up the 
attackers came with a rush. 

Stern saw the swing and crushing impact of the maces 
and iron clubs; he saw the stabbing of the spears on both 
sides. 

Slippery and red the parapet became. 

Men, killed there, crawled and struggled and fell both 
outward and inside, and were trampled in indiscriminate 
heaps, besieged and besiegers alike, still clawing, tearing, 
howling even in their death agony. 

Now one of the ladders was down  another fell, with 
horrid tumult  a third! 



t 




362 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

An automatic in each hand, Stern scrambled to the glairy 
summit of the fortification. 

A mace swung at him. He leaped sidewise, firing as he 
sprang. With a scream the ax-man doubled up and fell, 
and vanished in the gloom below the wall. 

Raking the parapet with a hail of lead, he mowed down 
the attackers on top of the fourth ladder. With a mighty 
shout, those inside staved it away with iron grapples. It, 
too, swayed drunkenly, held below, pushed madly above. 
It reeled  then fell with a horrible, grinding crash! 

" Hurray, boys ! One more down ! Give 'em Hell ! " he 
screamed. " One more ! " 

He turned. Subconsciously he felt that his right hand 
was wet, and hot, and dripping, but he felt no pain. 

" One more ! Now for another ! ' 

And in the opposite direction along the wall he emptied 
his other revolver. 

Before the stinging swarm of the steel-jacketed wasps 
of death the Lanskaam writhed and melted down with 
screams such as Dante in his wildest vision never even 
dreamed. 

Stem heard a great howl of triumph break from the 
mass of defenders fighting to overthrow the fifth ladder. 

" Hold 'em ! Hold 'em ! " he bellowed. " Wait tiU I 
load up again  Fll  " 

A swift and crashing impact dashed sheaves of radiant 
fire through his brain. 

Everything leaped and whirled. 

He flung up both hands. 

Clutching at empty air, then suddenly at the slippery 
parapet which seemed to have leaped up and struck him 
in the face, he fell. 

Came a strange numbness, then a stabbing pain. 

And darkness quenched all knowledge and all consciousness. 



CHAPTER XXIX 



SHADOWS OF WAR 



A BLUE and flickering gleam of light, dim, yet persistent, 
seeraed to enhalo a woman's face; and as Stem's weary 
eyes opened under languid lids, closed, then opened again, 
the wounded engineer smiled in his weakness. 

"Beatrice!" he whispered, ant! tried to stretch a hand 
to her, as she sat beside his bed of seaweed covered with 
the coarse brown fabric. " Oh, Beatrice ! Is this  is this 
another  hallucination? " 

She took the hand and kissed it, then bent above him 
and kissed him again, this time fair upon the lips. 

"No, boy," she answered. "No hallucination, but 
reality! You're all right now  and I'm all right! You've 
had a little fever and and  well, don't ask any questions, 
that's all. Here, drink this now and go to sleepl" 

She set a massive golden bowl to his mouth, and very 
gently raised his head. 

Unquest ion i ugly he drank, as though he had been a child 
and she his mother. The liquid, warm and somewhat sweet, 
had just a tang of some new taste that he had never known. 
Singularly vitalizing it seemed, soothing yet full of life. 
With a sigh of contentment, despite the numb ache in his 
right temple, he lay back and once more closed his eyes. 
Never had he felt such utter weakness. All his forces 
seemed drained and spent; even to breathe was very difficult 

Feebly he raised his hand to his head. 

" Bandaged.'' " he whispered. " What does that mean? " 

363 




364 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" It means you're to go to sleep now ! " she commanded. 
" That's all just go to sleep ! " 

He lay quiet a moment, but sleep would not come. A 
score, a hundred thoughts confusedly crowded his brain. 

And once more looking up at her in the dim blue gloom 
of the hut where they were, he breathed a question: 

" Were you badly hurt, dear, in  in the battle ? " 

" No, Allan. Just stunned, that's all. Not even wounded. 
Be quiet now or I'll scold!" 

He raised his arms to her and, weak though he was, took 
her to his breast and held her tight, tight. 

" Thank God ! " he whispered. " Oh, I love you ! I 
love you so ! If you'd been killed  " 

She felt his tears hot upon his wasted cheeks, and unloosened his arms. 

" There, there I " she soothed him. " You'll get into a 
fever again if you don't lie still and try not to think! 
You" 

"When was it? Yesterday?" he interrupted. 

'' Sh-h'h-h! No more questions now." 

" But I want to know! And what happened to me? And 
the  the Lanskaarn? What about them? And  " 

" Heavens, but you're inquisitive for a man that's just 
missed  I mean, that's been as sick as you have ! " she exclaimed, taking his head in both hands and gazing down 
at him with eyes more deeply tender than he had ever seen 
them. " Now do be good, boy, and don't worry about all 
these things, but go to sleep  there's a dear. And when 
you wake up next time  " 

" No, no I " he insisted with passionate eagerness.  I'm 
not that kind ! I'm not a child, Beta ! I've got to know  
I can't go to sleep without knowing. Tell me a little about 
it, about what happened, and then  then I'll sleep as long 
as you say I " 

She pondered a moment, weighing matters, then made 
answer : 

" All right, boy, only remember your promise ! " 



SHADOWS OF WAR 365 

" r will." 

"Good! Now listen. I'll tell you what the old man 
told me, for naturallj- I don't remember the last part of 
the fight any better than you do. 

" I was struck by a flying stone, and  well, it wasn't 
anything serious. It just stunned me for a while. I came 
to in a hut." 

" Where I carried you, dearest, just before I  " 

" Yes, I know, just before the battle-ax  " 

"Was it an ax that hit me?" 

" Yes. But it was only a glancing blow. Your long 
hair helped save you, too. But even so  " 

" Skul! cracked ? " 

" No, I guess concussion of the brain would be the right 
term for it." She took his groping hand in both her own 
warm, strong ones and kissed it tenderly. " But before you 
fell, your raking fire along the wall there  you understand  " 

" Cleaned 'em out, eh ? " he queried eagerly. 

" That's about it. It turned the tide against the Lanskaarn. And after that  I guess it was just butchery. I 
don't know, of course, and the old man hasn't wanted to 
tell me much ; but anyway, the ladders all went down, and 
the Folk here made a sortie from the gate, down the causeway, and and  " 

"And they've got a lot more of those infernal skeletons 
hanging on the poles by the fire ? " he concluded in a rasping whisper. 

She nodded, then kept a minute's silence. 

"Did any of 'cm get away in their canoes?" 

" A few. But in all their history the Folk never won 
such a victory. Oh. it was glorious, glorious! And all 
because of you I " 

"And you. dear! " 

"And now  now," she went on, "we're not prisoners 
any more, hut  " 

" Everything coming our way? Is that it? " 



i 




366 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" That's it. They dragged you out, after the battle, from 
under a big heap of bodies under the w:all." 

"Outside or inside?" 

" Outside, on the beach. They brought you in, for dead, 
boy. And I guess they had an awful time about you, from 
what I've found out  " 

" Big powwow, and all that ? " 

" Yes. If you'd died, they'd have gone on a huge war 
expedition out to the islands, wherever those are, and 
simply wiped out the rest of the Lanskaam. But  " 

" I'm glad I didn't," he interrupted. " No more killing 
from now on ! We want all the living humans we can get ; 
we need 'em in our business ! " 

Stern was growing excited; the girl had to calm him 
once more. 

" Be quiet, Allan, or I'll leave you this minute and you 
shan't know another thing ! " she threatened. 

"All right, I'll be good," he promised. "What next? 
I'm the Big Chief now, of course ? What I say now goesf " 

She answered nothing, but a troubled wrinkle drew between her perfect brows. For a moment there was silence, 
save for the dull and distant roaring of the flame. 

By the glow of the bluish light in the hut. Stem looked 
up at her. Never had she seemed so beautiful. The heavy 
masses of her hair, parted in the middle and fastened with 
gold pins such as the Folk wore, framed her wonderful 
face with twilight shadows. He saw she was no longer 
clad in fur, but in a loose and flowing mantle of the brown 
fabric, caught up below the breast with a gold-clasped 
girdle. 

" Oh, Beatrice," he breathed, " kiss me again ! " 

She kissed him; but even in the, caress he sensed an unvoiced anxiety, a hidden fear. 

" What's wrong? " asked he anxiously. 

" Nothing, dear. Now you must be quiet ! You're in 
the patriarch's house here. You're safe  for the present, 
and'' 



SHADOWSOFWAR 367 

"For the present? What do you mean?" 

" See here," the girl threatened, " if you don't stop asking 
questions, and go to sleep again, I'll leave you alone I " 

" In that case I promise ! " 

And now obedient, he closed his eyes, relaxed, and let 
her soothingly caress him. But still another thought obtruded on his mind. 

" Beatrice ? " 

" Yes, dearest." 

" How long ago was that fight?" 

"Oh, a little while. Never mind now!" 

"Yes, but how long? Two days? Four? Five?" 

" They don't have days down here," she evaded. 

" I know. But reckoning our way  five days ? " 

" Nearer ten, Allan." 

" Whatf But then" 

The girl withdrew her hand from him and arose. 

" I see it's no use, Allan," she said decisively. " So 
long as I stay with you you'll ask questions and excite yourself. I'm going ! Then you'll have to keep still ! " 

" Beta I Beta ! " he implored. " I'll be good I Don't 
leave me  you mustn't!" 

" All right ; but if you ask me another question, a single 
one, mind, I'll truly go! " 

" Just give me your hand, girlie, that's all 1 Come here 
 sit down beside me again  so ! " 

He turned on his side, on the rude couch of coarse brown 
fabric stuffed with dried seaweed, laid his hollow cheek 
upon her hand, and gave a deep sigh. 

" Now, I'm off," he murmured. " Only, don't leave me, 
Beta ! " 

For half an hour after his deep, slow breathing told that 
the wounded man was sleeping soundly  half an hour as 
time was measured where the sun shone, for down in the 
black depths of the abyss all such divisions were as naught, 
Beatrice sat lovingly and tenderly beside the primitive bed. 
Her right palm beneath his face, she stroked his long hair 



i 




368 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

and his wan cheek with her other hand; and now she 
smiled with pride and reminiscence, now a grave, troubled 
look crossed her features. 

The light, a fiber wick burning in a stone cup of oil upon 
a stone-slab table in the center of the hut, guttered unsteadily, casting huge and dancing shadows up the black 
walls. 

" Oh, my beloved ! ' whispered the girl, and bent above 
him till the loosened sheaves of her hair swept his face. 
 My love ! Only for you, where should I be now ? With 
you, how could I be afraid? And yet  " 

She turned at a sound from a narrow door opposite the 
larger one that gave upon the plaza, a door, like the 
other, closed by a heavy curtain platted of seaweed. 

There, holding the curtain back, stood the blind patriarch. 
His hut, larger than most in the strange village, boasted 
two rooms. Now from the inner one, where he had been 
resting, he came to speak with Beatrice. 

" Peace, daughter ! " said the old man. " Peace be unto 
you. He sleeps ? " 

" Yes, father. He's much better now, I think. His 
constitution is simply marvelous." 

' Verily, he is strong. But far stronger are those terrible and wonderful weapons of yours! If our Folk only 
had such I " 

"You're better off without them. But of course, if 
you want to understand them, he can explain them in due 
time. Those, and endless other things ! ' 

" I believe that is truth." The patriarch advanced into 
the room, and for a minute stood by the bedside with venerable dignity. " The traditions, I remember, tell of so 
many strange matters. I shall know them, every one. All 
in time, all in time!" 

"Your simple medicines, down here, are wonderful, 
said the girl admiringly. " What did you put into that 
draught I gave him to make him sleep this way?" 

 Only the steeped root of our n'gahar plant, my daughter 



SHADOWSOFWAR 369 

 a simple weed brought up from the bottom of this sea 
by our strong divers. It is nothing, nothing." 

Came silence again. The aged man sat down upon a 
curved stone bench that followed the contour of the farther 
wall. Presently he spoke once more. 

" Daughter," said he, " it is now ten sleeping-times  
nights, the English speech calls them, if I remember what 
my grandfather taught me  since the battle. And my son, 
here, still lies weak and sick. I go soon to get still other 
plants for him. Stronger plants, to make him well and 
powerful again. For there is haste now  haste ! " 

" You mean  Kamrou ? " 

" Yea, Kamrou 1 I know the temper of that evil man 
better than any other. He and his boats may return from 
the great fisheries in the White Gulf beyond the vortex at 
any time, and  " 

" But, father, after all we've done for the village here, 
and especially after what Allan's done? After this wonderful victory, I can't believe  " 

" You do not know that man ! " exclaimed the patriarch. 
" / know him ! Rather would he and his slay every living 
thing in this community than yield one smallest atom of 
power to any other," 

He arose wearily and gathered his mantle all about him, 
then reached for his staff that leaned beside the outer 
door. 

" Peace ! " he exclaimed, " Ah, when shall we have 
peace and learning and a better life again? The teaching 
and the learning of the English speech and all the arts you 
know, now lost to us  to us, the abandoned Folk in the 
abyss ? When ? When ? " 

He raised the curtain to depart ; but even then he paused 
once more, and turned to her. 

" Verily, you have spoken truth," said he, " when you 
have said that all, all here are with us, with you and this 
wondrous man now lying weak and wounded in my house. 




370 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

But Kamrou  is different. Alas, you know him notyou know him notl 

"Watch well over my son, here I Soon must he grow 
strong again. Soon, soonl Soon, against the coming 
of Kamrou. For if the chief returns and my son be weak 
still, then woe to him, to you, to me ! Woe to us all ! Woe, 
Woe!" 

The curtain fell. The patriarch was gone. Outside, 
Beatrice heard the click-click-click of his iron staff upon 
the smooth and flinty rock floor. 

And to her ears, mingled with the far roaring of the 
flame, drifted the words : 

" Woe, woe to him ! Woe to us all  woe  woe I " 



CHAPTER XXX 



EXPLORATION 

Under the ministering care of Beatrice and the patriarch. 
Stem's convalescence was rapid. The old man, consumed 
with terror lest the dreaded chief, Kamrou, return ere the 
stranger should have wholly recovered, spent himself in 
efforts to hasten the cure. And with deft skill he 
brewed his potions, made his salves, and concocted reviv 
fying medicines from minerals which only he  despite his 
bliudness  knew how to compound. 

The blow that had so shrewdly clipped Stem's skull 
must have inevitably killed, as an ox is dropped in the 
slaughter-house, a man less powerfully endowed with splendid energies and full vitality. 

Even Stern's wonderful physique had a hard fight to 
regain its finely ripened forces. But day by day he gained 
 we must speak of days, though there were only sleepingtimes and waking-times  until at length, upon the fifth, he 
was able for the first time to leave his seaweed bed and 
sit a while weakly on the patriarch's bench, with Be;ilricc 
beside him. 

Hand in hand they sat, while Stem asked many questions, and the old man, smiling, answered such as he saw 
fit. But of Kamrou neither he nor the girl yet breathed 
one syllable. 

Next day and the next, and so on every day, Stem was 
able to creep out of the hut. then walk a little, and finally 
 sometimes alone, sometimes with one or both his nurses  
go all among the wondering and admiring Folk, eagerly 



I 




372 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

 

watch their labors of all kinds, try to talk with them in the 
few halting words he w<is able to pick up, and learn many 
things of use and deepest interest. A grave and serious 
Folk they were, almost without games or sports, seemingly without religious rites of any kind, and lacking festivals such as on the surface every barbarous people had 
always had. 

Their fisheries, netmaking, weaving, ironwork, sewing 
with long iron needles and coarse fiber-thread keenly interested him. Accustomed now to the roaring of the flame, he 
seemed no longer to hear this sound which had at first so 
sorely disconcerted -him. 

He found out nothing concerning their gold and copper 
supply; but their oil, he discovered, they collected in pits 
below the southern wall of the village, where it accumulated 
from deep fissures in the rock. With joy he noted the large 
number of children, for this bespoke a race still vigorous 
and with all sorts of possibilities when trained. 

Odd little, silent creatures the children were, white-faced 
and white-haired, playless and grave, laboring like their 
elders even from the age of five or six. They followed him 
about in little troops, watching him soberly; but when he 
turned and tried to talk with them they scurried off like 
frightened rabbits and vanished in the always-open huts 
of stone. 

Thoroughly he explored every nook and comer of the 
village. As soon as his strength permitted, he even penetrated parts of the surrounding region. He thought at 
times to detect among the Folk who followed and surrounded 
him, unless he expressly waved them away, some hard looks 
here or there. Instinctively he felt that a few of the people, here one, there one, still held hate and bitterness against 
him as an alien and an interloper. 

But the mass of them now outwardly seemed so eager to 
serve and care for him, so quick to obey, so grateful almost 
to adoration, that Stem felt ashamed of his own suspicioas 




EXPLORATION 373 

and of the revolver that he still always carried whenever 
outside the patriarch's hut. 

And in his heart he buried his fears as unworthy delusions, as the imaginings of a brain still hurt. The occasional black looks of one or another of the people, or perchance some sullen, muttered word, he set down as the 
crude manners of a primitive and barbarous race. 

How little, despite all his skill and wit, he could foresee 
the truth 1 

To Beatrice he spoke no word of his occasional uneasiness, nor yet to the old man. Yet one of the very first 
matters he attended to was the overhauling of the revolvers, which had been rescued out of the melee of the battle 
and been given to the patriarch, who had kept them with a 
kind of religious devotion. 

Stem put in half a day cleaning and oiling the weapons. 
He found there still remained a hundred and six cartridges 
in his bandolier and the girl's. These he now looked upon 
as his most precious treasure. He divided them equally 
with Beatrice, and bade her never go out unless she had her 
weapon securely belted on. 

Their life at home was simple in the extreme. Beatrice 
had the inner room of the hut for her own. Stem and 
the patriarch occupied the outer one. And there, often 
far into the hours of the sleeping-time, when Beatrice was 
resting within, he and the old man talked of the wonders 
of the past, of the outer world, of old traditions, of the 
abyss, and a thousand fascinating speculations. 

Particularly did the old man seek to understand some 
notions of the lost machine on which the strangers had 
come from the outer world; but, though Stem tried most 
patiently to make him grasp the principle of the mechanism, 
he failed. This talk, however, set Stem thinking very 
seriously about the biplane ; and he asked a score of questions relative to the qualities of the native oil, to currents 
in the sea, locations, depths, and so on. 



t 



374 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

All that he could learn he noted mentally with the precision of the trained engineer. 

With accurate scientific observation he at once began to 
pile up information about the people and the village, the 
sea, the abyss everything, in fact, that he could possibly 
learn. He felt that everything depended on a sound understanding of the topography and nature of the incredible 
community where he and the grl now found themselves  
perhaps for a life stay. 

Beatrice and he were clad now like the Folk ; wore their 
hair twisted in similar fashion and fastened with heavy 
pins or spikes of gold, cleverly graven; were shod with 
sandals like theirs, made of the skin of a shark-like fish; 
and carried torches everywhere they went  torches of dried 
weed, close-packed in a metal basket and impregnated with 
oil. 

This oil particularly interested Stern. Its peculiar blue 
flame struck him as singular in the extreme. It had, moreover, the property of burning a very long time without 
being replenished. A wick immersed in it was never consumed or even charred, though the heat produced was intense. 

'' If I can't set up some kind of apparatus to distil that 
into gas-engine fuel, Tm no engineer, that's all," said Stem 
to himself. " All in time, all in time  but first I must take 
thought how to raise the old Pauillac from the sea." 

Already the newcomers' lungs had become absolutely accustomed to the condensed air, so that they breathed with 
entire ease and comfort. They even found this air unusually stimulating and revivifying, because of its greater 
amount of oxygen to the cubic unit; and thus they were 
able to endure greater exertions than formerly on the 
surface of the earth. 

The air never grew foul. A steady current set in the 
direction that Stern's pocket-compass indicated as north. 
The heat no longer oppressed them ; they were even getting 
used to the constant fog and to the darkness; and already 




EXPLORATION 



S 




fifi 



TEC iLL4ax or n 

Aftar ikilch fegr Altaa SUni. 



A. D. S91S isr 



I> CftUMinur 
P Huto 




Ite 



11 AWnt iMr ta 



DlUMPMB of 

.  .. Qravwrard 

P Hat of Puriank 

tovt Hft-liftl. Iifiti W tttit. iMir ft 



i 



376 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

could see far better than a fortnight previously, when they 
had arrived. 

Stern never could have believed he could learn to do 
without sunlight and starlight and the free winds of heaven; 
but now he found that even these were not essential to 
human life. 

Certain phenomena excited his scientific interest very 
keenly  such as the source of the great gas-flare in the 
village, the rhythmic variations in the air-current, the small 
but well-marked tides on the sea, the diminished force of 
gravitation  indicating a very great depth, indeed, toward 
the center of the earth  the greater density of the seawater, the heavy vaporization, certain singular rock-strata 
of the cliffs near the village, and many other matters. 

All these Stern promised himself he would investigate as 
soon as time and strength allowed. 

The village itself, he soon determined, was about half 
a mile long and perhaps a quarter-mile across, measuring 
from the fortified gate directly back to the huge flame near 
the dungeon and the place of bones. 

I He found, incidentally, that more than one hundred and 
sixty freshly boiled and headless skeletons were now dangling from the iron rods, but wisely held his peace concerning them. Nor did the patriarch volunteer any information 
alx)ut the loss of life of the Folk in the battle. Stem estimated there were now some fifteen hundred people, men, 
women and children, still remaining in the community ; but 
since he knew nothing of their ntmiber when he had arrived, he could not form more than a rough idea of the 
total slaughter. 

He found, however, on one of his excursions outside the 
walls  which at a distance of two hundred and fifty yards 
from the sea stretched in a vast irregular arc abutting at 
each end against the cliff  the graveyard of the polk. 
I This awesome and peculiar place consisted of heaps of 
smooth black boulders piled upon the dead, each heap sur


EXPLORATION 377 

mounted by a stone with some crude emblem cut upon it, 
such as a circle, a square, a cluster of dots, even the rude 
figure of a bird, a fish, a tortoise, and so on. 

Certain of the figures he could make nothing of ; but he 
concluded rightly they were totem-signs, and that they represented all which still remained of the an of writing 
among those barbarous remnants of the once dominant. 
powerful and highly cultured race of Americans. 

He counted more than two hundred freshly built piles of 
stone, but whether any of these contained more than one 
body of the Folk he could, of course, not tell. Allowing, 
however, that only two hundred of the Folk and one hundred and sixty of the Lanskaam had fallen, he readily perceived that the battle had been, f<k intensity and high percentage of killing, sanguinary beyond all battles of his 
own time. 

Under the walls, too, the vast numbers of boulders 
which had been thrown down, the debris of broken weapons, 
long and jaggedly barbed iron spear-points and so on, indicated the military ardor and the boldness of the fighting men 
he now had lo dominate and master. 

And in his soul he knew the problem of taming, civilizing, 
saving this rude and terrible people, was certainly the very 
greatest ever given into the hands of one man and one 
woman, since time began ! 

Along the beach he found a goodly number of empty 
revolver-shells. These he picked up, for possible reloading, 
in case he should be able at some later time to manufacture 
powder and some fulminating mixture. 

He asked the patriarch to have search made for all such 
empty shells. The Folk eagerly and intelligently cooperated, 

With interest he watched the weird sight of scores of 
men with torches rolling the great stones about, seeking 
for the precious cartridges. From the beach they tossed 
the shells up to him as he walked along the top of the fortifications so lately the scene of horrible combat ; and despite 
him his heart swelled with pride in his breast, to be already 



f 



378 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

directing them in some concerted labor, even so sUght as 
this. 

Save for some such interruption, the life of the community had now settled back into its accustomed routmc 

With diminished numbers, but indomitable energy, the 
Folk went on with their daily tasks. Stem concluded the 
great funeral ceremony, which must have taken place over 
the fallen defenders, and the horrible rites attending the 
decapitation, boiling, and hanging up of the trophies of war, 
the Lanskaarn skeletons, certainly must have formed a 
series of barbaric pictures more ghastly than any drugfiend's most diabolical nightmare. He thanked God that the 
girl had been spared these frightful scenes. 

He could get the old man to tell him nothing concerning 
these terrific ceremonies. But he discovered, some thirty 
yards to southward of the circle of stone posts, a boiling 
geyserlike pool in the rock floor, whence the thick steam 
continually arose, and which at times burst up in terrific 
seething. 

Here his keen eye detected traces of the recent rites. 
Here, he knew, the enemies' corpses  and perhaps even 
some living captives  had been boiled. 

And as he stood on the sloping, slippery edge of the great 
natural caldron, a pit perhaps forty feet in diameter  its 
margins all worn smooth and greasy by innumerable feet  
he shuddered in his soul. 

" Good God ! " thought he. " Imagine being flung in 
there ! " 

What was it, premonition or sheer repulsion, that caused 
him, brave as he was, to turn away with a peculiar and 
intense horror? 

Try as he might, he could not banish from his mind the 
horrible picture of that boiling vat as it must have looked, 
crammed to the lip with the ttunbling, crowding bodies of 
the dead. 

He seemed still to hear the groans of the wounded, the 



EXPLORATION 



379 



shrieks of the prisoners being dragged thither, being hurled 
into the spumy, scalding water. 

And in his heart he half despaired of ever bringing back 
to civilization a people so wild and warlike, so cruel, so 
barbarous as these abandoned People of the Abyss. 

Could he have guessed what lay in store for Beatrice and 
himself should Kamrou, returning, find them still there, a 
keener and deadlier fear would have possessed his soul. 

But of Kamrou he knew nothing yet. Even the chief's 
name he had not heard. And the patriarch, for reasons 
of his own, had not yet told the girl a tenth part of the 
threatening danger. 

Even what he had told, he had forbidden her  for Allan's 
own sake  to let him know. 

Thus in a false and fancied sense of peace and calm security, Stem made his observations, laid his plans, and day 
by day once more came back toward health and strength 
again. 

And day by day the unknown peril drew upon them 
both. 



b.. 



 



I 




CHAPTER XXXI 

ESCAPE? 

Who could, indeed, suspect aught of this threatening danger? Outwardly all now was peaceful. Each waking-time 
the fishers put forth in their long boats of metal strips 
covered with fish-skins. Every sleeping-time they returned 
laden with the fish that formed the principal staple of the 
community. 

The weaving of seaweed fiber, the making of mats, 
blankets, nets and slings went on as probably for many 
centuries before. 

At forges here and there, where gas-wells blazed, the 
smiths of the Folk shaped their iron implements or worked 
most skillfully in gold and copper; and the ringing of the 
hammers, through the dim-lit gloom around the strange 
blue fires, formed a chorus fit for Vulcan or the tempering 
of Siegfried's master-sword. 

Stern took occasion to visit many of the huts. They 
were all similar. As yet he could not talk freely with the 
Folk but he took keen interest in examining their household 
arrangements, which were of the simplest. Stone benches 
and tables, beds of weed, and coarse blankets, utensils of 
metal or bone  these completed the total. 

Stem groaned inwardly at thought of all the arts he 
still must teach them before they should once more even 
approximate the civilization whence they had fallen since 
the great catastrophe. 

Behind the village rose a gigantic black cliff, always 
dripping and running with water from the condensation of 

380 



ESCAPE? 361 

tlie fogs. This water the Folk very sensibly and cleverly 
drained down into large tanks cut in the rock floor. The 
tanks, always full, furnished their entire supply for drinking and cooking. Flat, warm and tasteless though it was, 
it seemed reasonably pure. None of this water was ever 
used for bathing. What little batliing the Folk ever indulged in took place at certain points along the shore, where 
the fine and jet-black sand made a good bottom. 

Along the base of the vast cliff, which, broken and 
jagged, rose gleaming in the light of the great flame till it 
gradually faded in the luminous mist, they carried on their 
primitive cooking. 

Over cracks in the stone, whence gas escaped steadily and 
burned with a blue flicker, hung copper pots fairly well fashioned, though of bizarre shapes. Here the communal cuisine went steadily forward, tended by the strange, whitehaired, long-cloaked women; and odors of boiling and of 
frying, over hot iron plates, rose and mingled with the shifting, swirling vapors from the sea. 

Beatrice tried, a few times, to take some part in this 
work. She was eager to teach the women better methods, 
but at last the patriarch told her to let them alone, as she 
was only irritating them. Unlike the men, who almost 
worshipped the revolvers, and would have handled them, 
and even quickly learned to shoot, if Stern had allowed, 
the women clung sternly to their old ways. 

The patriarch had a special cooking place made (or Beatrice, and got her a lot of the clumsy utensils. Here she 
busied herself preparing food for Allan and herself  and 
a strange sight that was, the American girl, dressed in her 
long, brown rohe, her thick hair full of gold pins, cooking 
over natural gas in the Abyss, with heavy copper pans and 
kellles of incredible forms! 

Almost at once, the old man abandoned the native cookery and grew devoted to hers. Anything that told him of 
the other and better times, the days about which he dreamed 
continually in his blindness, was very dear to him. 



/ 



382 DARKNESS KND DAWN 

The Merucaans were, truly, barbarously dull about their 
ways of preparing food. Day after day they never varied. 
The menu was limited in the extreme. Stem felt astonished 
that a race could maintain itself in such fine condition and 
keep so splendidly energetic, so keen and warlike, on such 
a miserable diet. The food must, he thought, possess nutritive qualities far beyond any expectation. 

Fish was the basis of all  a score of strange and unnatural-looking varieties, not one of which he had ever 
seen in surface waters. For the most part, they were gray 
or white; two or three species showed some rudiments of 
coloring. All were blind, with at most some faint vestigia 
of eye-structure, wholly degenerated and useless. 

" Speaking of evolution," said the engineer, one day, to 
Beatrice, as they stood on the black boulder-beach and 
watched the fishermen toss their weird freight out upon the 
slippery stones  " these fish here give a magnificent example of it. You see, where the use for an organ ceases, the 
organ itself eventually perishes. But take these creatures 
and put them back into the surface-ocean  ' 

" The eyes would develop again? " she queried. 

"Precisely! And so with everything! Take the Folk 
themselves, for instance. Now that they've been living here 
a thousand or fifteen hundred years, away from the sun 
light, all the protecting pigmentation that used to shield the 
human race from the actinic sun rays has gradually faded 
out. So they've got white hair, colorless skins, and pinkish 
eyes. Out in the world again, they'd gradually grow normal again. How I wish some of my old-time opponents to 
the evolutionary theory could stand here with me today in 
the Abyss ! I bet a million I could mighty soon upset their 
nonsense ! " 

Such of the fish as were not eaten in their natural state 
were salted down in vats hollowed in the rock, at the far 
end of the village. Still others were dried, strung by the 
gills on long cords of seaweed fiber, and hung in rows near 
the great flame. There were certain days for this process. 



ESCAPE? 383 

At other times no fish were allowed anywhere near the fire. 
Why this was, Stem could not discover. Even the patriarch 
would not tell him. 

Beside the fish, several seaweeds were cooked and eaten 
in the form of leaves, bulbs, and roots, which scmie of 
the Folk dived for or dragged from the bottom with iron 
grapples. All the weeds tasted alike to Stem and Beatrice ; 
but the old man assured them there were really great differences, and that certain of them were rare delicacies. 

A kind of huge, misshapen sea-turtle was the chief prize 
of all. Three were taken during the strangers' first fortnight in the Abyss ; but the fortunate boat-crews that brought 
them in devoured them, refusing to share even a morsel 
with any other of the people. 

Stem and the girl were warned against tasting any weed, 
fish, or mussel on their own initiative. The patriarch told 
them certain deadly species existed  species used only in preparing venoms in which to dip the spear and lance-points 
of the fighting men. 

Beyond these foods the only others were the flesh and 
gs of the highly singular birds the strangers had seen on 
their first entry into the village. These tasted rankly of 
fish, and were at first very disagreeable. But gradually the 
newcomers were able to tolerate them when cooked by Beatrice in as near an approximation to modern methods as 
she could manage. 

The birds made a peculiar feature of this weird, uncanny 
life. Ix)ng of leg, wattled and web-footed, with ungainly 
bodies, sparsely feathered, and bare necks, they were. Stem 
thought, absolutely the most hideous and unreal-appearing 
creatures he had ever seen. In size they somewhat resembled an albatross. The folk called them kalamakee. 
They were so fully domesticated as to make free with all 
the refuse of the village and even to waddle into the huts 
in croaking search of plunder; yet they nested among the 
broken rocks along the cliflF to northward of the place. 

There they built clumsy stmctures of weed for their eggs 



1 



384 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

and their incredibly ugly young. Every day at a certain 
time they took their flight out into the fog, with hoarse 
and mournful cries, and stayed the equivalent of some three 
hours. 

Their number Stem could only estimate, but it must 
have mounted well toward five or six thousand. One of 
the most singular sights the newcomers had in the Abjrss 
was the homecoming of the flight, the feeding of the young 
 by discharging half-digested fish  and the subsequent 
noisy powwow of the waddling multitude. All this, heard 
and seen by torch-light, produced a picture weirdly fascinating. 

Fish, weeds, sea-fowl  these constituted the sum total 
of food sources for the Folk. There existed neither bread, 
flesh-meat, milk, fruit, sweets, or any of the abundant vetables of the surface. Nor yet was there any plant which 
might be dried and smoked, like tobacco, nor any whence 
alcohol might be distilled. The folk had neither stimulants 
nor narcotics. 

Stem blessed fate for this. If any such had existed, 
he knew human nature well enough to feel certain that, 
there in the eternal gloom and fog, the race would soon 
have given itself over to excesses and have miserably perished. 

" To my mind," he said to Beatrice, one time, " the 
survival of our race under such conditions is one of the 
most marvelous things possibly to be conceived." Out 
toward the black and mist-hidden sea that rolled forever in 
the gloom he gestured from the wall where they were standing. 

" Imagine ! " he continued. " No sunlight  for centuries ! Without that, nothing containing chlorophyl can grow ; 
and science has always maintained that human life must 
depend, at last analysis, on chlorophyl, on the green plants 
containing it. No grains, no soil, or agriculture, no mammals even ! Why, the very Eskimo have to depend on mammals for their life! 



ESCAPE? 38s 

" But these people here, and the Lanskaarn, and whatever other unknown tribes live in this vast Abyss, have to 
get their entire Hving from this tepid sea. They don't even 
possess wood to work with! If this doesn't prove the 
human race all but godlike in its skill and courage and 
adaptability, what docs?" 

She stood a while in thought, plainly much troubled. It 
was evident her mind was far from following his analysis. 
At last she spoke. 

" Allan ! " she suddenly exclaimed. 

"Well?" 

" It's still out there somewhere, isn't it ? Out there, in 
those black, unsounded depths  the biplane?" 

" You mean  " 

" Why couldn't we raise it again, and  " 

" Of course! You know I mean to try as soon as I have 
these people under some control so I can get them to cooperate with me  get them to understand!" 

"Not till then? No escape till then? But, Allan, it 
may be too late! " she burst out with passionate eagerness. 

Puzzled, he turned and peered at her in the bluish gloom. 

"Escape?" he queried. "Too late? Why. what do 
you mean ? Escape from what ? You mean that we should 
leave these people, here, before we've even begun to teach 
them? Before we've discovered some way out of the 
lAbyss for them? Leave everything that means the regeneration of the human race, the world? Why  " 

A touch upon his arm interrupted him. 

He turned quickly to find the patriarch standing at his 
side. Silent and dim through the fog, he had come thither 
with sandaled feet, and now stood with a strange, inscrutable smile on his long-bearded lips. 

" What keeps my children here," asked he, " when already 
it is long past the sleeping-hour? Verily, this should not 
be ! Come," he commanded. " Come away ! Tomorrow 
will be time for speech." 

And, giving them no further opportunity to talk of this 



386 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

new problem, he spoke of other matters, and so led fhem 
back to his hospitable hut of stone. 

But for a long time Allan could not sleep. Weird 
thoughts and new suspicions now aroused, he lay and pcmdered many things. 

What if, after all, this seeming friendliness and homage 
of the savage Folk were but a mask? 

A vision of the boiling geyser-pit rose to his memory. 
And the dreams he dreamed that night were filled with 
strange, confused, disquieting images. 



CHAPTER XXXII 



PREPARATIONS 



He woke to hear a drumming roar that seemed to fill the 
spaces of the Abyss with a wild tumult such as he had never 
known  a steady thunder, wonderful and wild. 

Starting up, he saw by the dim light that the patriarch 
was sitting there upon the stone, thoughtful and calm, apparently giving no heed to this singular tumult. But Stern, 
not understanding, put a hasty question. 

"What's all this uproar, father? I never heard anything like that up in the surface-world! " 

" That? Only the rain, my son," the old man answered. 
"Had you no rain there? Verily, traditions tell of rain 
among the people of that day ! " 

"Rain? Merciful Heavens!" exclaimed the engineer. 
Two minutes later he was at the fortifications, gazing out 
across the beach at the sea. 

It would be hard to describe accurately the picture that 
met his eyes. The heaviest cloudburst that ever devastated 
a countryside was but a trickle compared with this monstrous, terrifying deluge. 

Some five hundred miles of dense and saturated vapors, 
suddenly condensing, were precipitating the water, not in 
drops but in great solid masses, thundering, bellowing, crashing as they struck the sea, which, churned to a deep and raging froth, flung mighty waves even against the massive 
walls of the village itself. 

The fog was gone now ; but in its place the rushing walls 
of water blotted out the scene. Yet not a drop was falling 

3?7 



388 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

in the village itself. Stern wondered for a moment. But, 
looking up, he understood. 

The vast cliff was now dimly visible in the glare of the 
great flame, the steady roar of which was drowned by the 
tumult of the rain. 

Stem saw that the village was sheltered under a tremendous overhang of the black rock; he understood why the 
ancestors of the Folk, coming to these depths after incredible adventurings and long-forgotten struggles, had settled 
here. Any exposed location would have been fatal; no 
hut could have withstood the torrent, nor could any man, 
caught in it, have escaped drowning outright. 

Amazed and full of wonder at this terrific storm, so 
different from those on the surface  for there was neither 
wind nor lightning, but just that steady, frightful sluicing 
down of solid tons of rain  Stern made his way back to 
the patriarch's house. 

There he met Beatrice, just awakened. 

" No chance to raise the machine to-day ! " she called to 
him as he entered. " He says this is apt to last for hours 
and hours ! " She nodded toward the old man, much di 
tressed. 

" Patience ! " he murmured. " Patience, friends and 
peace ! " 

Stern thought a moment. 

" Well," said he, at last, making himself heard only with 
difficulty, ' even so, we can spend the day in making ready." 

And, after the simple meal that served for breakfast, he 
sat down to think out definitely some plan of campaign for 
the recovery of the lost Pauillac. 

Though Stem by no means understood the prl's anxiety 
to leave the Abyss, nor yet had any intention of trying to 
do so until he had begun the education of the Folk and 
had perfected some means of trying to transplant this group 
 and whatever other tribes he could find  to the surface 
again, he realized the all-importance of getting the machine 
into his possession once more. 



PREPARATIONS 3IB9 

For more than an hour he pondered the qoestion, now 
asking a question of the patriarch  who seemed tCMn between desire to have the wonder-thing brought up, and 
fear lest he should lose the strangers  now designing gn)ples, now formulating a definite line of procedure. 

At last, all things settled in his mind he bade the old 
man get for him ten strong rcs, such as the largest nets 
were made of. These ropes which he had already seen 
coiled in huge masses along the wall at the northern end of 
the village, where they were twisted of the tough weedi 
fiber, averaged all of two hundred feet in length. When 
the patriarch had gone to see about having them brought 
to the hut, he himself went across the plaza, with Bealrice, 
to the communal smithy. 

There he appropriated a forge, hammers, and a qoanlity 
of iron bars, and energetically set to work fashioning a 
huge three-pronged hook. 

A couple of hours' hard labor at the anvil  labor which 
proved that he was getting back his normal strength once 
more  completed the task. Deftly he heated, shaped and 
reshaped the iron, while vast Brocken-shadows danced and 
played along the titanic cliff behind him, cast by the waver 
ing blue gas-flames of the forge. At length he found him 
self in possession of a drag weighing about forty pounds 
and provided with a stout ring at the top of the shank six 
inches in diameter. 

 Now/' said he to Beatrice, as he surveyed the finished 
product, while all about them the inquisitive yet silent Folk 
watched them by the unsteady light, " now I guess we're 
ready to get down to something practical. Just as soon as 
this infernal rain lets up a bit, we'll go angUog for the 
biggest fish that ever came out of this seal " 

But the storm was very far from being at an tad. The 
patriarch told Stern, when he brought the gnpfit to the 
hut  followed by a silent, all-observant crowd--that sometimes these torrential downpours lasted from three to ten 
sleep-times, with lulls between. 



390 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" And nobody can venture on the sea," he added, ' till we 
know  by certain signs we have  that the geat rain is 
verily at an end. To do that would mean to court death; 
and we are wise, from very long experience. So, my son, 
you must have patience in this as in all things, and wait I " 

Part of that afternoon of forced inactivity Stern spent in 
his favorite habit of going about among the Folk, closely 
mingling with them and watching all their industrial processes and social life, and trying, as usual, to pick up words 
and phrases of the very far-degenerated speech that once 
had been English but was now a grammarless and formless 
jumble of strange words. 

Only a few of the most common words he found retained 
anything like their original forms  such as vfhata, water; 
fohdu, food; yernuh, iron; vlaak, black; gomu, come; ghaa, 
go ; fysha, fish ; and so on for about forty others. 

Thousands upon thousands of terms, for which no longer any objects now existed among the Folk, had been of 
course utterly forgotten ; and some hundreds of new words, 
relative to new conditions, had been invented. 

The entire construction was altered; the language now 
bore no more resemblance to English than English had 
borne to the primitive Indo-Germanic of the Aryan forefathers. Now that writing had been lost, nothing retarded 
changes; and Stem realized that here  were he a trained 
philologist  lay a task incomparably interesting and diflScult, to learn this Merucaan speech and trace its development from his own tongue. 

But Stem's skill was all in other lines. The most that 
he could do was to make some rough vocabularies, learn 
a few common phrases, and here or there try to teach a 
little English. A deeper study and teaching, he knew, 
would come later, when more important matters had been 
attended to. 

His attempts to learn and to talk with these people  by 
pointing at objects and listening to their names  were ownparable to those, perhaps, of a prehistoric Goth turned 



PREPARATIONS 391 

loose in an American village of the twentieth century. Only 
the patriarch had retained the mother-tongue, and that in 
an archaic, imperfect manner, so that even his explanations 
often failed. Stem felt the baffling ditticulties in his way ; 
but his determination only grew. 

The rain steadily continued to drum down, now lessened, 
now again in terrific deluges of solid black water churned 
to white as they struck the sea and flung the froth on high. 
The two Americans passed an hour that afternoon in the 
old man's hut, drawing up a calendar on which to check 
as accurately as possible, the passage of time as reckoned 
in the terms of life upon the surface. 

They scratched this on a slab of slatelike rock, with a 
sharp iron awl; and, reckoning the present day as about 
October first, agreed that every waking-time they would 
cross off one square, 

" For," said the engineer, " it's most important that we 
ehould keep track of the seasons up above. That may 
have much to do with our attempts to transplant this colony. 
It would never do to take a people like this, accustomed to 
heat and vapor, and carry them out into even the mild 
winter that now prevails in a present-day December. If we 
don't get them to the surface before the last of this month, 
at latest  " 

"We'll have to wait until another spring?" asked she. 

" Looks that way." he assented, putting a few final 
touches to the calendar. " So you see it's up to us to 
hurry and certainly nothing more inopportune than this 
devilish rain could possibly have happened! Haste, haste! 
We must make haste 1 " 

" That's so ! " exclaimed Beatrice. " Every day's precious, now. We  " 

" My children," hurriedly interrupted the patriarch, " I 
never yet have shown you my book  my one and greatest 
treasure. The book I 

" You have told me many things, of sun and moon and 
starSf which are mocked at as idle tales by my unbelieving 



392 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

people ; of continents and seas, mountains, vast cities, great 
ships, strange engines moved by vapor and by lightning, tall 
houses; of words thrown along metal threads or even 
through the air itself ; of great nations and wars, of a hundred wondrous matters that verily have passed away even 
from the remotest memories of us in the Abyss ! 

" But of our history I have told you little; nor have you 
seen the book! Yet you must see it, for it alone remains 
to us of that other, better time. And though my folk 
mock at it as imposture and myth and fraud, you shall 
judge if it be true ; you shall see what has kept the English 
speech alive in me, kept memories of the upper world alive. 
Only the book, the book ! " 

His voice seemed strangely agitated. As he spoke he 
raised his hands toward them, sitting on the stone bench in 
the hut, while outside the rain still thundered louder than 
the droning roar of the great flame. Stem, his curiosity 
suddenly aroused, looked at the old man with keen interest 

"The book?" he queried. "What book? What's the 
name of it? What date? What  who wrote it, and  ' 

" Patience, friends ! " 

"You mean youVe really got an English book here in 
this village? A  " 

" A book, verily, from the other days ! But first, before 
I show you, let me tell you the old tradition that was handed 
down to me by my father and my father's fathers, down 
through centuries  I know not how many." 

"You mean the story of this Lost Folk in the Abyss?" 

" Verily ! You have told me yours, of your awakening, 
of the ruined world and all your struggles and your fall 
down into this cursed pit. Listen now to mine ! " 



CHAPTER XXXIII 



THE patriarch's TAt 






 In the beginning/' he commanded, slowly and thoughtfully,  our people were as yours ; they were the same. Our 
tradition tells that a great breaking of the world took place 
very many centuries ago. Out of the earth a huge portion 
was split, and it became as the moon you tell of, only dark. 
It circled about the earth  " 

" By Jove ! " cried Stern, and started to his feet. " That 
dark patch in the sky ! That moving mystery we saw nights 
at the bungalow on the Hudson ! " 
You mean  " the girl exclaimed. 

Its a new planetoid! Another satellite of the earth! 
It's the split-off part of the world ! " 

"Another satellite?" 

"Of course! Hang it, yes! See now? The great explosion that liberated the poisonous gases and killed practically everybody in the world must have gouged this new 
planet out of the flank of Mother Earth in the latter part 
of 1920. The ejected portions, millions of millions of 
tons, hundreds of thousands of cubic miles of solid rock 
 and with them the ruins of Chicago, Milwaukee, St. 
Louis, Omaha, and hundreds of smaller cities  are now all 
rcvolviiif in a fixed, regular orbit, some few thousand 
miles or so from the surface! 

 11iink I Ours are the only living human eyes that have 
seen this new world blotting out the stars! This explains 
everything  the singular changes in the tides and in the 
direction of the magnetic pole, decreased gravitation and 

393 



(C 

<( 



394 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

all the other strange things we noticed, but couldn't understand. By Gad ! What a discovery ! " 

The patriarch listened eagerly while Stern and the girl 
discussed the strange phenomenon; but when their excite 
ment had subsided and they were ready again to hear him, 
he began anew: 

'' Verily, such was the first result of the great catastrophe. And, as you know, millions died. But among the 
canons of the Rocky Mountains  so says the tradition; is 
it right ? Were there such mountains ? " 
Yes, yes ! Go on ! " 

In those canons a few handfuls of hardy people still 
survived. Some perished of famine and exposure; some 
ventured out into the lowlands and died of the gas that 
still hung heavy there. Some were destroyed in a great 
fire that the tradition says swept the earth after the explosion. But a few still lived. At one time the number was 
only eighteen men, twelve women and a few children, so 
the story goes." 

"And then?" 

"Then," continued the patriarch, his brow wrinkled in 
deep thought, " then came the terrible, swift cold. The people, still keeping their English tongue, now dead save for 
you two, and still with some tools and even a few books, 
retreated into caves and fissures in the canons. And so 
they came to the great descent," 

"The what?" 

" The huge cleft which the story says once connected the 
upper world with this Abyss. And  " 

" Is it open now? " cried Stern, leaning sharply forward. 

" Alas, no ; but you hurry me too much, good friend. 
You understand, for a long time they lived the cave-life 
partly, and partly the upper life. And they increased a 
great deal in the hundred years that followed the explosion. 
But they never could go into the plains, for still the gas 
hung there, rising from a thousand wells  ten thousand, 



THE PATRIARCH'S TALE 395 

mayhap, all very deadly. And so they knew not if the rest 
of the world lived or died." 

" And then ? " queried the engineer. " Let's have it all 
in outline. What happened ? " 

' This, my son : that a still greater cold came upon the 
world, and the life of the open became impossible. There 
were now ten or twelve thousand alive ; but they were losing their skill, their knowledge, everything. Only a few 
men still kept the wisdom of reading or writing, even. For 
life was a terrible fight. And they had to seek food now in 
the cave-lakes; that was all remaining. 

' After that, another fifty or a hundred years, came the 
second great explosion. The ways were closed to the 
outer world. Nearly all died. What happened even the tradition does not tell. How many years the handful of people 
wandered I do not know. Neither do I know how they 
came here. 

" The stor>' says only eight or ten altogether reached this 
sea. It was much smaller then. The islands of the Lanskaarn, as we call them now, were then joined to the land 
here. Great changes have taken place. Verily, all is different ! Everytliing was lost  language and arts, and even 
the look of the Folk. 

 We became as you see us. The tradition itself was 
forgotten save by a few. Sometimes we increased, then 
came pestilences and famines, outbreaks of lava and hot 
mud and gases, and nearly all died. At one time only 
seven remained  ' 

' For all the world like the story of Pitcaim Island and 
the mutineers of the ' Bounty ' ! " interrupted the engineer. 

Yes, yes  go on ! '' 

There is little more to tell. The tradition says there 
was once a place of records, where certain of the wisest 
men of our Folk placed all their lore to keep it; but even 
this place is lost. Only one family kept any knowledge of 
the English as a kind of inheritance and the single book 
went with that family  ' 






396 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" But the Lanskaam and the other peoples of the Abyss, 
where did they come from ? " asked Stem eagerly. 

The patriarch shook his head. 

" How can I tell ? " he answered. " The tradition says 
nothing of them." 

" Some other groups, probably," suggested Beatrice, 
" that came in at different times and through other ways." 

" Possibly," Stern assented. " Anything more to tell ? " 

" Nothing more. We became as savages ; we lost all 
thought of history or learning. We only fought to live! 
All was forgotten. 

" My grandfather taught the English to my father and 
he to me, and I had no son. Nobody here would learn from 
me. Nolx)dy cared for the book. Even the tradition they 
laughed at, and they called my brain softened when I spoke 
of a place where in the air a light shone half the time 
brighter even than the great flame! And in every way 
they mocked me! 

 So I  I "  the old man faltered, his voice tremulous, 
while tears glittered in his dim and sightless eyes  " I 
ceased to speak of these things. Then I grew blind and 
could not read the book. No longer could I refresh my 
mind with the English. So I said in my heart: 'It is 
finished and will soon be wholly forgotten forever. This 
is the end.' 

" Verily, I laid the book to rest as I soon must be laid 
to rest! Had you not come from that better place, my 
thought would have been true  " 

" But it isn't, not by a jugful ! " exclaimed the engineer 
joyously, and stood up in the dim-lit little room. " No, 
sir! She and I, we're going to change the face of things 
considerably! How? Never mind just yet. But let's 
Iiave a look at the old volume, father. Gad! That must 
be some relic, eh? Imagine a book carried about for a 
thousand years and read by at least thirty generations of 
men ! The book, father ! The book ! " 



THE PATRIARCH'S TALE 397 

Already the patriarch had arisen and now he gesttired 
at the heavy bench of stone. 

" Can you nio\e this, my son ? " asked he. " The place 
of the book lies beneath." 

" Under there, eh ? All right ! " And. needing no other 
invitation, he set his strength against the massive block of 
giteiss. 

It yielded at the second effort and, sliding ponderously 
to one side, revealed a cavity in the stone floor some two 
feet long by about eighteen inches in breadth. 

Over this the old man stooped. 

" Help me, son," bade he. " Once I could lift it with 
ease, but now the weight passes my strength." 

" What ? The weight of a book ? But where is it ? In 
this packet, here?" 

He touched a large and close-wrapped bundle lying in 
the little crypt, dimly seen by the flicker of the oily wick. 

"Yea. Raise it out that I may show you!" answered 
the patriarch. His hands trembled with eagerness; in his 
blind eyes a sudden fever seemed to bum. For here was 
his dearest, his most sacred treasure, all that remained to 
him of the long- worshipped outer world  the world of the 
vague past and of his distant ancestors  the world that 
Stern and Beatrice had really known and seen, yet which 
to him was only "all a wonder and a wild desire." 

" Lay the book upon the bench," he ordered. " I will 
unwrap it! " 

Complex the knots were, but his warped and palsied fingers deftly undid (hem as though long familiar with each 
turn and twist. Then off came many a layer of the rough 
brown seaweed fabric and afterward certain coverings of 
tough shark-skin neatly sewn. 

" The lH)ok t " cried the patriarch. " Now behold it I " 

"Thalt" exclaimed Beatrice, "I never saw a book of 
that shape ! " 

" Each page is separately preserved, wherefore it is so 
very thick," explained the old man. "See here?" 



i 




398 DARKNESS AND. DAWN 

He turned the leaves reverently. Stem, peering closely 
by the dim light, saw that they were loosely hung together 
by loops of heavy gold wire. Each page was held between 
two large plates of mica, and these plates were securely 
sealed around the edges by some black substance like varnish or bitumen. 

"Only thus," explained the patriarch, "could we hope 
to save this precious thing. It was done many hundreds of 
years ago, and even then the book was almost lost by age 
and use." 

" I should say so ! " ejaculated Stem. Even sealed in its 
air-tight covering, he saw that every leaf was yellow, 
broken, rotten, till the merest breath would have disintegrated it to powder. A sense of the infinitudes of time 
bridged by this volume overwhelmed him ; he drew a deep 
breath, reached out his hand and touched the wondrous relic 
of the world that was. 

" Long ago,' continued the old man, " when the book began to crumble, one of my ancestors copied it on gold plates, 
word by word, letter by letter, every point and line. And 
our family used only that book of gold and put away the 
other. But in my grandfather's time the Lanskaam raided 
our village and the gold plates went for loot to make them 
trinkets, so they were lost. 

" My father meant to begin the task again, but was killed 
in a raid. I, too, in my fighting youth, had plans for the 
work; but blindness struck me before I could find peace 
to labor in. So now all that remains of the mother tongue 
here is my own knowledge and these tattered scraps. And, 
if you save us not, soon all, all will be lost forever ! " 

Much moved, the engineer made no reply, yet thoughts 
came crowding to his brain. Here visibly before him he 
beheld the final link that tied these lost Folk to the other 
time, the last and breaking thread. What history could this 
book have told? What vast catastrophies, famines, pestilences, wars, horrors had it passed through? In what unwritten cataclysms, in what anguish and despair and long 



THE PATRIARCH'S TALE 399 

degeneration had the human mind still clung to it and cherished it? 

No one could tell; yet Stern felt the essence of its unknown story. An infinite pathos haloed the ancient volume. 
And reverently he touched its pages once again ; he bent 
and by the guttering light tried to make out a few words 
here or there upon the crackled, all but perished leaves. 

He came upon a crude old woodcut, vague and dim; then 
a line of text caught his eye. 

" By Gad ! ' Pilgrim's Progress ' I " he exclaimed. " Look, 
Beatrice  'Pilgrim's Progress,' of all books! No wonder 
he says ' Verily ' and talks archaic stuff and doesn't catch 
more than half we say. Well, I'll be  " 

" Is this then not the English of your time? " asked the 
patriarch. 

"Hardly! It was centuries old at the epoch of the 
catastrophe. Say, father, the quicker you forget this and 
take a few lessons in the up-to-date language of the real 
world that perished, the better! I see now why you don't 
get on to the idea of steamships and railroads, telephones 
and wireless and all the rest of it. God 1 but you've got a 
lot to learn ! " 

The old man closed up the precious volume and once 
more began wrapping it in its many coverings. 

" Not for me, all this, I fear," he answered with deep 
melancholy. " It is too late, too late  I cannot understand." 

" Oh, yes. you can, and will ! " the engineer assured him. 
" Buck up. father ! Once I get my biplane to humming 
again you'll learn a few things, never fear I " 

He stepped to the door of the hut and peered out. 

"Rain's letting up a bit," he announced. "How about 
it? Do the signs say it's ready to quit for keeps? If soall aboard for the dredging expedition I " 




CHAPTER XXXIV 

THE COMING OF KAMROU 

The storm, in fact, was now almost at an end, and when 
the engineer awoke next morning he found the rain had 
wholly ceased. Though the sea was still giving forth white 
vapors, yet these had not yet reached their usual density. 
From the fortifications he could see, by the reflected lights 
of the village and of the great flame, a considerable distance 
out across the dim, mysterious sea. He knew the time was 
come to try for the recovery of the machine, if ever. 

" If I don't make a go of it to-day," said he, " I might 
as well quit for good. There'll never be a better opportunity. 
And if it's left down there very much longer. Heaven only 
knows what kind of shape it'll be in. I make good to-day 
or it's all oflf.' 

Beatrice eagerly seconded his plans. The old man too, 
was impatient as a child to learn more of this wonder of the 
upper world. And, translating to the Folk the directions 
that Stern gave him, he soon had a great throng on the 
beach, where lay not only the Folk's canoes, but also many 
left by the slaughtered and dispersed Lanskaarn. 

Two hours after the crude meal that must be called breakfast for want of a better name, the expedition was ready to 
start. 

Twenty-five of the largest boats, some holding twelve men, 
set out, to the accompaniment of shouting and singing much 
like that when the captives had been brought in. Stern, 
Beatrice and the patriarch all sat in one canoe with eight 
paddlers. In the bottom lay Stern's heavy grapple with 

400 



THE COMING OF KAMROU 401 

the ten long ropes, now twisted into a single cable, securely 
knotted to its ring. 

To Stem it seemed impossible that any means existed for 
locating, even approximately, the spot where the machine 
had fallen. As the shore faded away and the village tights 
disappeared in the gloom and mist, all landmarks vanished. 
Everywhere about them the dim, oily sea stretched black 
and gloomy, wilh here and there the torches of the little fleet 
casting strange bliie-grecn lights that wavered like ghostly 
will-o'-the-wisps over the water. 

The boatman's song wailed high, sank low, trembled and 
ceased; and for a while came silence, save for the dipping 
of the paddles, the purling of the waters at the bow of the 
canoe. The engineer, despite his hard-headed practicality, 
shuddered a little and drew his manlle closer round him. 

Beatrice, too, felt the eery mystery of the scene. Stem 
put an arm about her; she slid her hand into his, and thus 
in silence they sat thinking while the boats drew on and 

"They really know where they're going, father?" the 
engineer asked at length. " It all looks alike to me. How 
can they tell?" 

" Verily, I cannot explain that to you," the old man made 
answer. " We know, that is alt," 

" But" 

" Had I been always blind you could not expound sight to 
me. A deaf man cannot understand sound." 

" You mean you've developed some new sense, some 
knowledge of direction and location that we haven't got?" 

" Yea, it must be so. In all these many centuries among 
the dark mists we have to know. And this gloom, thia 
night, are the same to us as you have told me a lake on the 
surface would be to yoti in the brightness of that sun which 
none of use have ever yet beheld." 

" Is that BO? Well, hanged if I get it! However, no matter about that just so they locate the place. Can they find 
the exact spot, father?" 



W" 



402 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

'' Perhaps not so. But they will come near to it, my son. 
Only have patience ; you shall see ! " 

Stern and the girl relapsed into silence again, and for 
perhaps a quarter-hour the boats moved steadily forward 
through the vapors in a kind of crescent, the tips of which 
were hidden by the mist. 

Then all at once a sharp cry rang from a boat off to the 
right, a cry taken up and echoed all along the line. The 
paddles ceased to ply ; the canots now drifted idly forward, 
their wakes trailing out behind in long " slicks " of greasy 
blackness flecked with sparkles from the reflected light of 
all those many torches. 

Another word of command; the boatmen slowed their 
craft. 

" Drop the iron he, son, and drag the bottom," said the 
patriarch. 

" Good ! " answered Stern, thrilled with excitement and 
wonder. 

He pitched the dredge into the jetty sea. It sank silently 
as he payed out the cable. At a depth he estimated  from 
the amount of cable still left in the boat  as about thirty 
fathoms, it struck bottom. 

He let out another five fathoms. 

"All right, father!" he exclaimed sharply. "Tell our 
boatmen to give way ! " 

The old man translated the order : " Ghaa vrouaad, 
fn'yaun!" (Go forward, men.) The paddles dipped again 
and Stem's canoe moved silently over the inky surface. 

Every sense alert, the engineer at the gunwale held the 
cable. For a few seconds he felt nothing as the slack was 
taken up ; then he perceived a tug and knew the grapple was 
dragging. 

Now intense silence reigned, broken only by the sputter of 
the smoking torches. The canoes, spaced over the foggy sea, 
seemed floating in a void of nothingness ; each reflected light 
quivered and danced with weird and tremulous patterns. 

Stern played the cable as though it were a fish-line. All 



THE COMING OF KAMROU 403 

his senses centered on interpreting the message it conveyed. 
Now he felt that it was dragging over sand; now came 
rocks  and once it caught, held, then jerked free. His heart 
leaped wildly. Oh, had it only been the aeroplane ! 

The tension grew. Out, far out from the drifting line of 
boats the canoe went forward; it turned at a word from 
the patriarch and dragged along the front of the line. It 
criss-crossed on its path ; Stem had to admire the skill and 
thoroughness with which the boatmen covered the area 
where their mysterious sixth sense of location told them 
the machine must lie. 

All at once a tug, different from all others, yielding, yet 
firm, set his pulses hammering again. 

' Got it ! '' he shouted, for he knew the truth. " Hold 
fast, there  she's hooked! " 

' You've got it, Allan ? Really got it ? " cried the girl, 
starting up. " Oh'' 

' Feel this! " he answered. " Grab hold and pull! " 

She obeyed, trembling with eagerness. 

' It's caught through one of the ailerons, or some yielding 
part, I think," he said. " Here, help me hold it tight, now; 
we mustn't let the hook slip out again! " To the patriarch 
he added : " Tell 'em to back up, there  easy easy ! " 

The canoe backed, while Stern took up the slack again. 
When the pull from below was vertical he ordered the boat 
stopped. 

' Now get nine other boats close in here," commanded 
he. 

The old man gave the order. And presently nine canoes 
stood in near at hand, while all the rest lay irregularly 
grouped about them. 

Now Stern's plan of the tenfold cable developed itself. 
Already he was untwisting the thick rope. One by one he 
passed the separate cords to men in the other boats. And 
in a few minutes he and nine other men held the ropes, 
which, all attached to the big iron ring below, spread upward like the ribs of an inverted umbrella. 



t 




404 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

The engineer's scheme was working to perfection- Wdl 
he had realized that no one boat could have sufficed to lift 
the great weight of the machine. Even the largest canoe 
would have been capsized and sunk long before a single 
portion of the Pauillac and its engine had been so much 
as stirred from the sandy bottom. 

But with the buoyant power of ten canoes and twenty or 
thirty men all applied simultaneously, Stem figured he had 
a reasonable chance of raising the sunken aeroplane. The 
fact that it was submerged, together with the diminished 
gravitation of the Abyss, also worked in his favor. And as 
he saw the Folk-men grip the cords with muscular hands, 
awaiting his command, he thrilled with pride and with 
the sense of real achievement. 

" Come, now, boys ! " he cried. " Pull ! Heave-ho, there 1 
Altogether, lift her ! Pull! " 

He strained at the rope which he and two others held ; the 
rest each rope now held by three or four men  bent their 
back to the labor. As the ropes drew tense, the canoes 
crowded and jostled together. Those men who were not 
at the ropes, worked with the paddles to keep the boats 
apart, so that the ropes should not foul or bind. And 
in an irregular ring, all round the active canoes, the others 
drew. Lighted by so many torches, the misty waters glittered as broken waves, thrown out by the agitation of the 
canoes, radiated in all directions. 

' Pull, boys, pull ! " shouted the engineer again. ' Up she 
comes ! Now, all together ! " 

Came a jerk, a long and dragging resistance, then a 
terrific straining on the many cords. The score and a half 
of men breathed hard ; on their naked arms the veins and 
muscles swelled ; the torchlight gleamed blue on their sweating faces and bodies. 

And spontaneously, as at all times of great endeavor 
among the Folk, a wailing song arose ; it echoed through the 
gloom ; it grew, taken up by the outlying boats ; and in the 



THE COMING OF KAMROU 405 

eternal dark of the Abyss it rose, uncanny, soul-shaking, 
weird beyond all telling. 

Stern felt the shuddering chills chase eacli other up and 
down his spine, playing a nervous accompaniment to tiieir 
chant. 

" Gad! " he muttered, shivering, " what a situation for a 
hard-headed, practical man like mel It's more like a scene 
from some weird pipe-dream magazine story of the remote 
past than solid reality!" 

Again the Folk strained at the ropes, Stem with them ; and 
now the great weight below was surely rising, inch by inch, 
up, up, toward the black and gleaming surface of the abysmal sea. 

Stem's heart was pounding wildly. If only  incredible 
as it seemed  the Pauillac really were there at the end of the 
converging ropes; and if it were still in condition to be 
repaired again! If only the hook and the hard-taxed ropes 
held! 

"Up, boys! Heave 'er!" he shouted, pulling till his 
muscles hardened like steel, and the canoe  balanced, though 
it was by five oarsmen and the patriarch all at the other 
gunwale  tipped crazily. " Pull ! Full! " 

Beatrice sprang to the rope. Unable to restrain herself, 
she, too, laid hold on the taut, dripping cord ; and her white 
hands, firm, muscular, shapely, gripped with a strength 
one could never have guessed lay in them. 

And now the ropes were sliding up out of the water, 
faster, ever faster; and higher rose the song of all those 
laboring Folk and all who watched from the outlying ring of 
boats. 

" Up with it, men ! Up ! " panted the engineer. 

Even as he spoke the waters beneath them began to boil 
and bubble strangely, as though with the rising of a monstrous fish : and all at once, with a heave, a sloshing splatter, 
a huge, weed-covered, winglike object, sluicing brine, wallowed sharply out into the torchlight. 

A great triumphal howl rose from the waiting Folk  a 




4o6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

howl that drowned Stem's cheer and that of Beatrice, and 
for a moment all was confusion. The wing rose, fell, slid 
back into the water and again dipped upward. The canoes 
canted; some took water; all were thrown against each other 
in the central group; and cries, shouts, orders and a wild 
fencing off with paddles followed. 

Stern yelled in vain orders that the old man could not 
even hear to translate ; orders which would not, even though 
heard, have been obeyed. But after a moment or two comparative order was restored, and the engineer, veins standing out on his temples, eyes ablaze, bellowed : 

" Hold fast, you ! No more, nor more  don't pull up any 
more, damn you! Hey, stop that  you'll rip Jie hook clean 
out and lose it again 1 

" You, father  here  tell 'em to let it down a little, now  
about six feet, so. Easy  does it  easy! " 

Now the Pauillac, sodden with water, hanging thickly 
with the luxuriant weed clusters which even in a fortnight 
had grown in that warm sea, was suspended at the end 
of the ten cords about six or eight feet below the keels of 
the canoes. 

" Tell 'em to let it stay that way now," continued the engineer. '' Tell 'em all to hold fast, those that have the ropes. 
The others paddle for the shore as fast as they can  and 
damn the man that loafs now! " 

The patriarch conveyed the essence of these instructions 
to the oarsmen, and now, convoyed by the outlying boats, the 
ten canoes moved very slowly toward the village. 

Retarded by the vast, birdlike bulk that trailed below, they 
seemed hardly to make any progress at all. Stem ordered 
the free boats to hitch on and help by towing. Lines were 
passed, and after a while all twenty-five canoes, driven by 
the power of two hundred and fifty pairs of sinewy arms, 
were dragging the Pauillac shoreward. 

Stern's excitement  now that the machine was really almost in his grasp again  far from diminishing, was every 
minute growing keener. 



THE COMING OF KAMROU 407 

The delay until he could examine it and see its condition and its chances of repair, seemed interminable. Omtinually he urged the patriarch himself profoundly moved 
 to force the rowers to still greater exertion. At a paddle 
he labored, throwing every ounce of strength into the toil. 
Each moment seemed an hour. 

" Gad! If it's only possible to make it fly again! " thought 
he. 

Half an hour passed, and now at length the dim and 
clustered lights of the village began to show vaguely through 
the mist. 

" Come on, boys ; now for it t " shouted Stern. " Land 
her for me and I'll show you wonders you never even 
dreamed of! " 

They drew near the shore. Already Stern was formulating his plans for landing the machine without injuring 
it, when out from the beach a long and swift canoe put 
rapidly, driven by twenty men. 

At sight of it the rowing in Stern's boats weakened, then 
stopped. Confused cries arose, altercations and strange 
shouts; then a hush of expectancy, of fear, seemed to possess tile boat crews. 

And ever nearer, larger, drew the long canoe, a twopronged, blazing cresset at its iaows. 

Across the waters drifted a word. 

" Go on, you ! Row I " cried Stern. " Land the machine, 
I tell you! Say, father, what's the matter ficnc? What are 
my men on strike for all of a sudden? Why don't they 
finish the job? " 

The old man. perplexed, listened intently. 

Between the group of canoes and the shore the single 
boat had stopped. A man was standing upright in it. Now 
came a clear hail, d now two or three sentences, peremptory, angry, harsh. 

At sound of them consternation seized certain of the 
men. A number dropped the ropes, while others reached 



i 




4o8 DARKNESS 'AND DAWN 

for the slings and spears that always lay in the bottoms of 
the canoes. 

" What the devil nowf " shouted Stern. " You all gone 
crazy, or what? " 

He turned appealingly to the old man. 

'For Heaven's sake, what's up?" he cried. "Tell mc, 
ca''t you, before the idiots drop my machine and ruin the 
whole thing? What" 

 Misfortune, O my son ! " cried the patriarch in a strange, 
trembling voice. " The worst that could befall ! In our 
absence he has come back  he, Kamrou ! And under pain 
of death he bids all men abandon every task and haste to 
homage. Kamrou the Terrible is here!" 



CHAPTER XXXV 

FACE TO FACE WITH DEATH 

For a moment Stem stared, speechless with amazement, at 
the old man, as though to determine whether or not he had 
gone mad. But the commotion, the mingled fear and anger 
of the boat crews convinced him the danger, though unknown, was very real. 

And. flaring into sudden rage at this untimely interruption just in tlie very moment of success, he Jerked his pistol 
from its holster, and stood up in the boat. 

" I'll have no butting in here ! " he cried in a loud, harsh 
voice, "Who the devil is Kamrou, I'd like to know? 
Go on, on, lo shore!" 

" My son  " 

" You order these men to grab those ropes again and go 
ashore or I warn you there's going to be a whole big heap 
of trouble ! " 

Over the waters drifted another hail, and the strange 
long boat, under the urge of vigorous arms, now began to 
move toward Stem's fleet. -At the same time, mingled cries 
arose on shore. Stern could see lights moving back and 
forth; some confusion was under way there, though what, 
he could not imagine. 

"We!!," he cried, "are you going to order these men to 
go forward? Or shall I  with this?" 

And menacingly he raised the grim and ugly gun. 

" Oh my son ! " exclaimed the patriarch, his lips twitching, his hands outstretched  while in the boats a babel of 
conSicting voices rose  " O my son, if I have sinned in 
409 




4IO DARKNESS AND DAWN 

keeping this f rcwn you, now let me die ! I hid it from yoor 
knowledge, verily, to save my people  to keep you with 
us till this thing should be accomplished! My reckoning 
was that Kamrou and his men would stay beyond the Great 
Vortex, at their labor, until after  " 

' Kamrou?" shouted Stem again. "What the deuce 
do I care about him ? Who is he, anyhow ? A LanskaarOf 
or  

The girl seized Allan's hand. 

: Oh, listen, listen ! " she implored. " I" 

 Did you know about this? And never told me?" 

 Allan, he said our work could all be done before the-r 

" So you did know, eh ? " 

" He said I must not tell you. Otherwise  " 

" Oh, hang that ! See here, Beatrice, what's the matter, 
anyhow? These people have all gone crazy, just in a 
second, the old man and all ! If you know anything about 
it, for God's sake tell me! I can't stand much morel 

" I've got to get this machine to land before they go entirely nutty and drop it, and we lose all our work for nothing. What's up? Who's this Kamrou they're talking 
about? For Heaven's sake, tell me!" 

" He's their chief. Allan  their chief! He's been gone 
a long time, he and his men. And  " 

" Well, what do we care for him? We're running this 
village now, aren't we? " 

" Listen. The old man says  " 

" He's a hard nut, eh ? And won't stand for us  is that 
it ? " He turned to the patriarch. " This Kamrou you're 
talking about doesn't want us, or our new ideas, or anything? Well, see here. There's no use beating around the 
bush, now. This things going through, this plan of ours! 
And if Kamrou or anybody else gets in the way of it  good 
by for him!" 

" You mean war ? " 

"War! And I know who'll win, at that! And now, 



FACE TO FACE WITH DEATH 411 

fatiier, you get these men here to work again, or there'll be 
some sudden deaths round here ! " 

" Hearken, O my son I Already the feast of welcome to 
Kamrou is beginning, around the flame. See now, the boat 
of his messenger is dose at hand, bidding all those in this 
party to hasten in, for homage. Kamrou will not endure 
divided power. Trust me now and 1 can save you yet. For 
the present, yield to him, or seem to, and  " 

" Yield nothing! " fairly roared the engineer, angrier than 
he had ever been in liis whole life. " This is my affair 
now! Nobody else butts in on it at all! To shore with 
these boats, you hear? or I begin shooting again! And if 
I do" 

" Allan ! " cried the girl. 

" Not a word I Only get your gun ready, that's all. 
We've got to handle this situation sharp, or it's all off! 
Come, father," he delivered his ultimatum to the patriarch; 
" come, order them ashore! " 

The old man, anguished and tremulous, spoke a few 
words. Answers arose, here, there. He called something 
to the standing figure in the despatch-boat, which slackened, 
stopped, turned and headed for the distant beach. 

With some confusion the oarsmen of the fleet took up 
their task again. And now, in a grim silence, more disconcerting even than the previous uproar, the boats made 
way toward land. 

Ten minutes later  minutes during which the two Americans kept their revolvers ready for instant action  the aeroplane began to drag on the bottom. Despite the crowd now 
gathered on the beach, very near at hand and cMninously 
silent. Stern would not let the machine lie even here, in 
shallow water, where it could easily have been recovered at 
any time. TJke a bulldog with its jaws set on an object, he 
clung to his original plan of landing the Pauillac at once. 

And, standing up in the boat with his pistol leveled, he 
conmianded them, through the mediumship of the patriarch, to shorten the ropes and paddle in still closer. 



f 




412 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

When the beach was only a few rods distant he gave 
orders that all should land, carrying the ropes with them. 
He himself was one of the first to wade ashore, with Beatrice. 

Ignoring the silent, expectant crowd and the tall figure 
of Kamrou's messenger  who now stood, arms crossed, 
amazed, indignant, almost at the water's edge  he gave 
quick commands: 

" Now, clear these boats away on both sides! Make a 
free space, here  wider  so, that's right. Now, all you 
men get hold of the ropes  all of you, here, take hold, you I 
Ready, now? Give way, then! Out she comes I Out 
with her!" 

The patriarch, standing in fear and keen anxiety beside 
him, transmitted the orders. Truly the old man's plight 
was hard, torns he was between loyalty to the newcomers 
and terror of the implacable Kamrou. But Stern had no 
time to think of aught but the machine and his work. 

For now already the great ungainly wings of the machine 
were wallowing up, up, out of the jetty waters; and now 
the body, now the engine showed, weed-festooned, smeared 
with mud and slime, a strange and awesome apparition in 
that blue and ghastly torch-flare, as the toiling men hauled 
it slowly, foot by foot, up the long slope of the beach. 

Dense silence held the waiting throng; silence and awe, 
in face of this incomprehensible, tremendous thing. 

Even the messenger spoke not a word. He had lost 
somewhat of his assurance, his pride and overbearing 
haughtiness. Perhaps he had already heard scMne tales of 
these interlopers' terrible weapons. 

Stern saw the man's eyes follow the revolver, as he 
gestured with it ; the high-lights gleaming along the barrel 
seemed to fascinate the tall barbarian. But still he drew 
no step backward. Still in silence, with crossed arms, he 
waited, watched and took counsel only with himself. 

 Thank God, it's out at last !" exclaimed the engfineer, 
and heaved a sigh of genuine, heartfelt relief. " See, Bea


FACE TO FACE WITH DEATH 413 

trice, there's our old machine again  and except for that 
broken rudder, this wing, here, bent, and the rent where 
the grapple tore the leather covering of the starboard plane, 
I can't see that it's taken any damage. Provided the engine's 
intact, the rest will be easy. Plenty of chance for metalwork, here, and  " 

" Going to take it right up to the village, now ? " queried 
she, an.xiously glancing at the crowd of while and silent 
faces, all eagerly staring  staring like so many wraiths in 
a strange dream. 

He shrugged his shoulders. 

" That depends," he answered. He seemed already to 
have forgotten Kamrou and the threatening peril in the 
village, near the great fiame. Even the sound of distant 
chanting and the thudding of dull drums stirred him not. 
Fascinated, he was walking all round the great mechanical 
bird, which now lay wounded, weed-covered, sodden and 
dripping, yet eloquent of infinite possibilities, there on that 
black, unearthly beach. 

All at once he spoke. 

" Up to the village with it ! " he commanded, waving his 
pistol-hand toward the causeway and the fortified gates. 
" I can't risk leaving it here. Come, father, speak to them! 
It's got to go into the village right now! " 

Then Kamroii's messenger, grasping the sense if not the 
words of the command, strode forward  a tall, lithe figure 
of a man. well-knit and hard of face. Under the torchlight the dilated pupils of his pinkish eyes seemed to shine 
as phosphorescent as a cat's. 

Crying out something unintelligible to Stern, he blocked 
the way. Stem heard the name " Kamrou! Kamroul" 

"Well, what do you want now?" shouted the engineer, 
a huge and sudden anger seizing him. Already super-excited by the labors of the day and by the nervous strain of 
having recovered the sunken biplane, all this talk of Kamrou, all this persistent opposition Just at the moat inauspi 
dous moment worked powerfully upon his irritated nerves. 




414 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Cool reason would have dictated diplomacy, parley, and, 
if possible, truce. But Stern could not believe the Folki for 
so long apparently loyal to him and dominated by his influence, could work against their vital interest and his own 
by deserting him now. 

And, all his saner judgment failing him, heeding nothing 
of the patriarchs entreaties or of the girl's remonstrance 
as she caught his arm and tried to hold him back, he faced 
this cooly insolent barbarian. 

" You, damn you, what d'you want? " he cried again, his 
finger itching on the trigger of the automatic. " Think I'm 
going to quit for you, or Kamrou, or anybody? Quit, 
now? 

" Think a civilized white man, sweating his heart out to 
save your people here, is going to knuckle under to any 
savage that happens to blow in and try to boss this job? 
If so, you've got another guess coming! Stand back, you, 
or you'll get cold lead in just one minute I " 

Quick words passed from the old man to the messenger 
and back again. The patriarch cried again to him, and for 
a moment Stem saw the barbarian's eyes flicker uneasily 
toward the revolver. But the calm and cruel face never 
changed, nor did the savage take one step backward. 

" All right, then ! " shouted Stem, " seeing red " in his 
overpowering rage. " You want it  you'll get it  take it, 
so!" 

Up he jerked the automatic, fair at the big barbarian's 
heart  3, splendid target by the torch-light, not ten feet 
distant; a sure shot. 

But before he could pull trigger the strange two-pronged 
torch was tossed on high by somebody behind the messenger, and through the dull and foggy gloom a wild, fierce, 
penetrant cry wailed piercingly. 

Came a shooting, numbing pain in Stern's right dbow. 
The arm dropped, helpless. The boulder which, flung with 
accurate aim, had destroyed his aim, rolled at his feet The 
pistol clattered over the wet, shining stones. 



FACE TO FACE WITH DEATH 415 

Stem, cursing madly, leaped and snatched for it with 
the other hand. 

Before he could even reach it a swift foot tripped him 
powerfully. Headlong he fell. And in a second one of 
the very ropes that had been used to drag the Pauillac from 
the depths was lashed about his wrists, his ankles, his struggling, fighting body. 

' Beatrice ! , Shoot I Kill ! " he shouted. " Help here I 
Help! The machine  they'll wreck it I Everything  lost I 
Help!" 

His speech died in a choking mumble, stifled by the wet 
and sodden gag they forced into his mouth. 

About him the mob seethed. Through his brain a quick 
anguish thrilled, the thought of Beatrice unaided and alone. 
Then came a wonder when the death-stroke would fall  a 
frightful, sick despair that on the very eve of triumph, of 
salvation for this Folk and for the world as well as for 
Beatrice and himself, this imforeseen catastrophe should 
have befallen. 

He struggled still to catch some glimpse of Beatrice, to 
cry aloud to her, to shield her ; but, alone against five hundred, he was powerless. 

Nowhere could he catch even a glimpse of the girl. In 
that shoving, pushing, shouting horde, nothing could be 
made out. He knew not even whether civil war had blazed 
or whether all alike had owned the rule of Kamrou the 
Terrible. 

Like buoys tossing upon the surface of a raging sea, the 
flaring torches pitched and danced, rose, fell. And from a 
multitude of throats, from beach and causeway, walls and 
town, strange shouts rang up into the all-embracing, vague, 
enshrouding vapor. 

Still striving to fight, bound as he was, he felt a great 
force driving hira along, on, on, up the beach and toward 
the village. 

Mute, desperate, stark mad, he knew the Folk were half 
carrying, half dragging him up the causeway. 



f 




I 
416 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

As in a dark dream, he vaguely saw the great fortified 
gate with its huge, torch-lighted monolithic lintel. Even 
upon this some of the Folk were crowded now to viratch 
the strange, incredible spectacle of the man who had once 
turned the tide of battle against the Lanskaam and had 
saved all their lives, now haled like a criminal back into the 
community he had rescued in its hour of sorest need. 

His mind leaped to their first entry into the village  it 
seemed months ago  also as prisoners. In a flash he recalled all that had happened since and bitterly he mocked 
himself for having dared to dream that their influence had 
really altered these strange, barbarous souls, or uplifted 
them, or taught them anything at all. 

' Now, now just as the rescue of these people was at 
hand, just as the machine might have carried us and them 
back into the world, slowly, one by one  now comes defeat 
and death! ' 

An exceeding great bitterness filled his soul once more 
at this harsh, cynic turn of fate. But most of all he yearned 
toward Beatrice. That he should die mattered nothing; 
but the thought of this girl perishing at their hands there 
in the lost Abyss was dreadful as the pangs of all the fabled 
hells. 

Again he fought to hold back, to try for some sight, even 
a fleeting glimpse of Beatrice ; but the Folk with harsh cries 
drove him roughly forward. 

He could not even see the patriarch. All was confusion, 
glare, smoke, noise, as he was thnist through the fortified 
gate, out into the thronged plaza. 

Everywhere rose cries, shouts, vociferations, among 
which he could distinguish only one a thousand times repeated : " Kamrou ! Kamrou ! " 

And through all his rage and bitter bafflement and pain, 
a sudden great desire welled up in him to see this chief of 
the Folk, at last  to lay eyes on this formidable, this terrible one  to stand face to face with him in whose hand now 
lay everything, Kamrou! 



FACE TO FACE WITH DEATH 417 

Across the dim, fog-covered expanse of the plaza he saw 
the blue-green shimmer of the great flame. 

Thither, toward that strange, eternal fire and the ghastly 
circle of Uie headless skeletons the Folk were driftiiig now. 
Thither his captors were dragging him. 

And there, he knew, Kamrou awaited Beatrice and hintL 
There doom was to be dealt out to them. There and at 
once! 

Thicker the press became. The flame was very near now, 
its droning roar almost drowning the great and growiqg 
babel of cries. 

On, on the Folk bore him. All at (Hice he saw again tiiat 
two-pronged torch raised before him, going ahead; and a 
way cleared througli the press. 

Along this way he was carried, no longer struggltng, but 
eager now to know the end, to meet it bravdy and with 
calm philosophy, " as fits a man." 

And quite at once he found himself in sight of the many 
dangling skeletons. Now the quivermg jet of the flame 
grew visible. Now, suddenly, he was thrust forward into 
a smooth and open space. Silence fell. 

Before him he saw Kamrou, Kamrou the Terrible, at 
last. 



f 




CHAPTER XXXVI 

GAGE OF BATTLE 

The chief of the People of the Abyss was seated at his 
ease in a large stone chair, over which heavy layers of 
weed-fabric had been thrown. He was flanked on either 
side by spearsmen and by drummers, who still held their 
iron sticks poised above their copper drums with shark-skin 
heads. 

Stem saw at a glance that he was a man well over six 
feet tall, with whipcord muscles and a keen, eager, domineering air. Unlike any of the other Folk, his hair (snowwhite) was not twisted into a fantastic knot and fastened 
with gold pins, but hung loose and was cut square off at 
about the level of his shoulders, forming a tremendous, 
bristly mass that reminded one of a lion's mane. 

Across his left temple, and involving his left eye with 
a ghastly mutilation, ran a long, jagged, bright red scar, 
that stood out vividly against the milk-white skin. In his 
hands he held no mace, no symbol of power; they rested 
loosely on his powerful knees; and in their half-crooked 
fingers, large and long. Stern knew there lay a formidable, 
an all but irresistible strength. 

At sight of the captives  for Beatrice, too, now suddenly appeared, thrust forward through another lane among 
the Folk  Kamrou's keenly cruel face grew hard. His lips 
curled with a sneer of scorn and hate. His pinkish eyes 
glittered with anticipation. Full on his face the flare of 
the great flame fell ; Stern could see every line and wrinkle, 
and he knew that to beg mercy from this huge barbarian 

418 



GAGEOFBATTLE 419 

(even though he would have begged), were a task wholly 
vain and futile. 

He glanced along the circle of expectant faces that ringed 
the chief at a distance of some fifteen feet. Surely, thought 
he, some of the many Folk that he and the girl had saved 
from butcherj', some to whom they had taught the rudiments of the world's lost arts, would now show pity on 
them  would stand by them now ! 

But no; not one face of all that multitude  now that 
Kamrou had returned  evinced other than eager interest 
to see the end of everything. To Stern Hashed the thought 
that here, despite their seeming half-civilization in the use 
of metals, lire, dwellings, fabrics and all the rest, dwelt 
within them a savagery even below that of the ancient, longextinct American Indians. 

And well he knew that if both he and Beatrice were not 
to die the death this day, only upon themselves they must 
depend ! 

Yes, one face showed pity. But only one  the patriarch's. 

Stern suddenly caught sight of him, standing in the front 
rank of the circled crowd, about twenty feet away to the 
left, just beyond the girl. Tears gleamed in the old man's 
sightless eyes ; his lips quivered ; the engineer saw his hands 
tremble as he twisted the feeble, impotent fingers together 
in anguish. 

And though he could catch no sound in that rising, falling, ever- roaring tumult of the flame, he knew the patriarch, with some vague and distant remnant of the old-time 
and vanished religion of the world, was striving to pray. 

Stern's eyes met the girl's. Neither could speak, for 
she, too, was gagged with a rough band of fabric which 
cruelly cut her beautiful, her tender mouth. At sight of her 
humiliation and her pain, the man's heart leaped hotly; 
he strained against his bonds till the veins swelled, and with 
eyes of terrible rage and hate stared at Kamrou 

But the chief's gaze was now fixed insolently upon Beatrice. She, as she stood there, stripped even of her revolver 



/ 



GAGE OF BATTLE 421 

captive or free, can ever challenge our chief, whosoever he 
be, to the death-combat. If the chief wins, he remains chief. 
If he loses, the victor takes his place. Many hundreds of 
years, I know not how long, this has been our way. And 
many terrible combats have been seen here among our 
people. 

' Kamrou has said that you must die, the girl must be his 
prize. Only one way remains to save her and yourself  
you must struggle with Kamrou. I have delivered to him 
your challenge already. Let fate decide the issue 1 " 

Everything seemed to whirl before Stern's eyes, and for 
a moment all grew black. In his ears sounded a great roaring, louder than the roar of the huge flame. Quick questions flashed through his mind. Fight Kamrou? But how? 
A duel with revolvers? Spears? Maces? 

He knew not. Only he knew that in whatever way the 
ancient combats must be held he was ready ! 

 You affirm the challenge I have given in your behalf?" 
demanded the patriarch.  If you accept it, nod." 

Stern nodded with all the vigor of his terrible rage. Kamrou's eyes narrowed ; his smile grew fixed and hard, but in 
it Stern perceived the easy contempt of a bully toward any 
chance weakling. And through him thrilled a passion of 
hate such as he had never dreamed in all his life. 

Came a (juick word from the patriarch. Somebody was 
slashing the engineer's bonds. All at once the ropes gave 
way. Free and unfettered, he stepped forward, stretching 
his arms, opening and closing his cramped, numbed hands, 
out into the ring toward Kamrou, the chief. 

OfT came tiie gag. Stern could speak at last. 

His first word was to the girl. 

" Beatrice! " he called to her, "there's one chance left! 
I'm to fight this ruffian here. If I beat him we're free  we 
own this tribe, body and soul! If not  " 

He broke oflF short. Even the possibility was not to be considered. 

She looked at him and understood his secret thoufht. 



/ 




422 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Well the man knew that Beatrice would die by her own Hand 
before Kamrou should have his way with her. 

The patriarch spoke again. 

" My son," said he, " there is but one way for all these 
combats. It has been so these many centuries. By the 
smooth edge of the great boiling pit the fights are held. Man 
against man it is. Verily, you two with only your hands 
must fight ! He who loses  " 

 Gk)es into the pit ? ' 

The old man nodded. 

" There is no other way," he answered. " The new, terrible weapons you cannot use. The arrows, slings and 
spears are all forbidden by ancient custom. It is the naked 
grasp of the hands, the strong muscles of two men against 
each other ! So we decide our chief ! 

" I, alas, can help you in nothing. I am powerless, weak, 
old. Were I to interfere now and try to change this way, 
my own body would only go to the pit, and my old bones 
hang, headless, in the place of captives and criminals. All 
lies in your hands, my son ! 

"All; everything! Our whole future, and the future of 
the world! If you lose, the wonderful machine will be 
destroyed and all its metal forged into spears and battleaxes. Barbarism will conquer ; darkness will continue, and 
war, and death. All will be forever lost! 

" The last ray of hope, of light, from the great past of the 
upper world, will vanish forever ! Your own death, my son, 
and the fate of the girl, will be as nothing beside the terrible catastrophe, if you are beaten. 

" For, verily, it will be the death of the world ! 

" And now, my son, now go to battle  to battle for this 
woman, for yourself, for us, for the future of our race, for 
everything ! 

Kamrou is ready. The pit is boiling. 
Go now I Fight  and  and  ' 

His voice was lost in a great tumult of cries, yells, shouts. 



 



GAGE OF BATTLE 



423 



Spears brandished. Came a sound of shields struck with 
clubs and axes. The copper drums again began to throb and 
clang. 

Kamrou had risen from his seal. 

Stem knew the supreme moment of his hfe was at hand. 



k 




CHAPTER XXXVII 

THE FINAL STRUGGLE 

Kamrou flung off his long and heavy cloak. He stood there 
in the flamelight, broad-chested, beautifully muscled, lean of 
hip, the perfect picture of a fighting man. Naked he was, 
save for his loin-cloth. And still he smiled. 

Stern likewise stripped away his own cloak. Clad only 
like the chief, he faced him. 

" Well, now," said he, " here goes ! And may the best 
man win !  

Kamrou waved the circle back at one side. It opened, 
revealing the great pit to southward of the flame. Stesin 
saw the vapors rising, bluish in that strange light, from the 
perpetual boiling of the black waters in its depths. Oddly 
enough, even at that moment a stray bit of scientific thought 
nicked into his consciousness  the memory that under compressed air water boils only at very high temperatures. 
Down here, in this great pressure, the water must easily be 
over three hundred degrees to seethe like that. 

He, too, smiled. 

" So much the better," thought he. " The hotter the 
sooner it's all over for the man who goes ! " 

Up rose numbers of the two-pronged torches. Stem got 
confused glimpses of the Folk  he saw the terrible, barbaric 
eagerness with which they now anticipated this inevitable 
tragedy of at least one human death in its most awful form. 

Beatrice he no longer saw. Where was she? He knew 
not. But in a long, last cry of farewell he raised his voice. 
Then, with Kamrou, he strode toward the steaming, boiling 
pit in the smooth rock floor. 

424 



THE FINAL STRUGGLE 425 

Two tall men broke through the tensely eager throng. 
In their hands they bore each a golden jar, curiously shaped 
and chiseled, and bearing a whimsical resemblance to a coffee-urn. 

" What the devil now ? " wondered Stem, eager to be at 
work. He saw at once the meaning of the jars. One of 
the bearers approached Kamrou. The other came to him. 
They raised the vessels, and over the antagonists' bare bodies 
poured a thin, warm stream of some rank-smelling oil. All 
over the skin they rubbed it, till the bodies glistened strangely in the flamelight. Then, with muttered words he could 
not catch, they withdrew. 

All seemed confused and vague to Stem as in a painful 
dream. Images and pictures seemed to present themselves 
to his brain. The light, the fog and heat, the rising stream, 
the roaring of the flame, and over all the throb-throb-throb 
of those infernal copper drums worked powerfully on his 
senses. 

Already he seemed to feel the grip of Kamrou, the pangs 
of the hard struggle, the sudden plunge into the vat of 
scalding death. 

With a strong effort he flung off these fancies and faced 
his sneering foe, who now  his red-wealed face puckered 
into a malicious grin  stood waiting. 

Stern all at once saw the patriarch once more. 

" Go, son !  cried the old man. " Now is the moment ! 
When the drums cease, lay hold of him ! " 

Even as he spoke, the great drums slowed their beat, then 
stopped. 

Stern, with a final thought of Beatrice, advanced. 

All the advantage lay with Kamrou. Familiar with the 
place was he, and with the rules of this incredible contest. 
Everywhere about him stood crowding hundreds of his Folk, 
owing him their allegiance, hostile to the newcomer, the 
man from another world. Out of all that multitude only 
two hearts beat in sympathy and hope for him; only two 




426 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

human beings gave him their thoughts and their supporta helpless girl ; a feeble, blind old man. 

Kamrou stood taller, too, than Stem, and certainly bulked 
heavier. He was in perfect condition, while Stem had not 
yet fully recovered from the fight in the Abyss, from the 
great change in living conditions there in the depths, and 
 more important still  from the harsh blow of the rock that 
had numbed his elbow on the beach. 

His arms and hands, too, still felt the cramping of the 
cords that had bound him. He needed a few hours yet to 
work them into suppleness and perfect strength. But 
pite there was none. 

He must fight now at once under all handicaps, or du 
and in his death yield Beatrice to the barbaric passions of 
the chief. 

Oddly enough there recurred to his mind, as he drew near 
the waiting, sneering Kamrou, that brave old warcry of the 
Greeks of Xenophon as they hurled themselves against the 
vastly greater army of the Persians  " Zens Sotor kcH Nihil 
 Zeus Savior and victory I " 

The shout burst from his lips. Forward he ran, on to the 
battle where either he or the barbarian must perish in the 
boiling pit  forward, to whatT To victory  to deathf 

Kamrou stood fast till Stem's right hand had almost 
gripped his throat  for Stem, the challenger, had to deliver 
the first attack. 

But suddenly he slipped aside; and as Stern swerved for 
him, made a quick leap. 

With an agility, a strength and skill tigerlike and marvelous, he caught Stem round the waist, whirled him and 
would have dashed him toward the pit. But already the 
engineer's right arm was under Kamrou's left; the right 
hand had him by the throat, and Kamrou's head went sharply back till the vertebrae strained hard. 

Eel-like, elusive, oiled, the chief broke the hold, even as 
he flung a leg about one of Stem's. 

A moment they swayed, tugging, straining, panting. In 



THE FINAL STRUGGLE 437 

the old days Stern would not for one moment have been a 
match for this barbaric athlete, but the long months of life 
close to nature had hardened him and toughened every fiber. 
And now a stab of joy thrilled through him as he realized 
that in his muscles lay at least a force to balk the savage for 
a little while. 

To Stern came back his wrestling lore of the very loi 
ago, the days of Harvard, in the dim, vanished past. He 
freed his left arm from the gorilla-like grip of Kamrou, and, 
quick as lightning, got a jiu-jitsu stranglehold. 

The savage choked, gurgled, writhed ; his face grew purple with stagnant blood. Then he leaped, dragging the engineer with him; they fell, rolled, twisted  and Stern's hold 
was broken, 

A great shout rose as Kamrou struggled up and once 
more seized the American. He raised him like a child, and 
took a step, two, three, toward the infernal caldron in the 
rock floor. 

Stern, desperate, wrenched his oiled arms clear. A second later they had closed again about the chief's throat  
the one point of attack that Stern had chosen for his best. 

The barbarian faltered. Grunting, panting, he shook the 
engineer as a dog shakes a rat, but the hold was secure. 
Kamrou's great arms wrapped themselves in a formidable 
" body-scissors " grip ; Stem felt the breath squeezed from 
his body. 

Then suddenly the chief's oily heel slipped on the smootKwom rock, not ten feet from the lip of the bubbling vat  
and for the second time both fell. 

This time Stern was atop. Over they rolled, once, twice, 
straining with madness. Stern's thumbs were sunk deep 
in the throat of the barbarian at either side. As he gouged 
harder, deeper, he felt the terrific pounding of the chief's 
jugular. Hot on his own neck panted the choking breath of 
Kamrou. Oh, could he only hold that grip a minute longct 
 even a half-minute ! 

But already his own breath was gone. A buzzing fiUec 




428 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

his ears ; sparkling lights danced, quivering before his eyes. 
The blood seemed bursting his brain ; far off and vague he 
heard the droning of the flame, the shouts and cries of the 
great horde of watchers. 

A whiflf of steam  hot, damp, terrifying  passed across 
his face, in which the veins were starting from the oily skin. 
His eyes, half closed, bulged from the sockets. He knew 
the pit was very close now ; dully he heard its steady bubbling. 

" If I go he goes, too! " the engineer swore to himself. 
" He'll never have  Beatrice  anyway! " 

Over and over they rolled, their grips tight-locked as 
steel. Now Kamrou was on top, now Stern. But the chief's 
muscles were still strong as ever; Stern's already had bq;un 
to weaken. 

Strive as he might, he could not get another hold, nor 
could he throw another ounce of power into that he already 
had. Up, up, slowly up slipped the chief's arms; Stem 
knew the savage meant to throttle him ; and once those long 
prehensile fingers reached his throat, good-by ! 

Then it seemed to him a voice, very far and small, was 
speaking to him, coolly, impersonally, in a matter-of-fact 
way as though suggesting an experiment. 

Dazed as he was, he recognized that voice  it was the 
voice of Dr. Harbutt, who once had taught him many a wily 
trick upon the mat ; Harbutt, dead and gone these thousand 
years or more. 

" Why not try the satsu-da, Stern ? ' the voice was saying. 
" Excellent, at times." 

Though Stern's face was black and swollen, eyes shut 
and mouth all twisted awry in this titanic struggle with the 
ape-hold of the huge chief, yet the soul within him calmly 
smiled. 

The satsu-da  yes, he remembered it now, strongest and 
best of all the jiu-jitsu feats. 

And, suddenly loosening his hands from the chief's throat, 
he clenched his right fist, hard as steel. 



THE FINAL STRUGGLE 



429 



A second later the " killing-blow " had fallen on the barbarian's neck, just where the sweUing protuberance behind 
the ear marked the vital spot. 

Terrible was the force of that blow, struck for his own 
life, for the honor of Beatrice, the salvation of the world, 

Kamrou gave a strange grunt. His head fell backward. 
Both eyes closed ; the mouth lolled open and a glairy froth 
began to trickle down. 

The frightful grip of the long, hairy arms relaxed. Exhausted, Stern fell prone right on tlie slippery edge of the 
boiling pit. 

He felt a sudden scalding dash of water, steam and boiling spray ; he heard a sudden splash, then a wild, barbarous, 
long-drawn howling of Ihc massed Folk. 

Lying there, spent, gasping, all but dead in the thick 
steam-drift of the vat, he opened his eyes. 

Kamrou was nowhere to be seen. 

Seemingly very distant, he heard the copper drums begin 
to beat once more with feverish haste. 

A great, compelling lassitude enveloped him. He knew no 



L 




CHAPTER XXXVIII 

THE SUN OF SPRING 

" What altitude now? Can you make-out, Allan? " 

" No. The aneroid's only good up to five miles. Wc must 
have made two hundred, vertically, since this morning. The 
way the propeller takes hold and the planes climb in this 
condensed air is just a miracle ! " 

" Two passengers at that ! " Beatrice answered, leaning 
back in her seat again. She turned to the patriarch, who, 
sitting in an extra place in the thoroughly overhauled and 
newly equipped Pauillac, was holding with nervous hands 
to the wire stays in front of him. 

" Patience, father," she cheered him. " Two hours more 
'  not over three, at the outside  and you shall breathe the 
upper air again! For the first time the sunlight shall fall 
upon your face ! " 

"The sun! The sun! Oh, is it possible?" murmured 
the aged man. " Verily, I had never thought to live until 
this day ! The sun! " 

Came silence between these three for a time, while the 
strong heart of the machine beat steadily ; and the engineer, 
with deft and skilful hand, guided it in wide-swept spirals 
upward, ever up, up, up, back toward the realms of day, of 
life, once more ; up through the fogs and clouds, away from 
heat and dark and mystery, toward the clear, pure, refreshing air of heaven again. 

At last Stern spoke. 

" Well, father," said he, " I never would have thought it ; 
but you were right, after all ! They're like so much clay in 

430 



THESUNOFSPRING 431 

the potter's hand now, for me. I see I can do with them 
whatever I will. 

" I was afraid some of them might object, after all, to 
any such proposition. It s one thing for them to accept me 
as boss down there, and quite another for them to consent 
to wholesale transplanting, such as we've got under way. 
But I can't see any possible reason why  with plenty of 
time and patience  the thing can't be accomplished all right. 
The main difficulty was their consent; and now we've got 
that, the rest is mere detail and routine work." 

" Time and patience," repeated the girl. " Those are our 
watchwords now, boy. And we've got lots of both, haven't 
we?" 

 Two passengers each trip," the engineer continued, more 
practical than she,  and three trips a week, at the most 
makes six of the Folk landed on the surface weekly. In 
other words, it'll take  " 

" No matter about that now ! " interrupted Beatrice. 
' We've got all the time there is ! Even if it takes five years, 
what of that ? What are months or even years in the lifehistory of the world?" 

Stern kept silence again. In his mind he was revolving a 
hundred vital questions of shelter, feeding, acclimatization 
for these men, now to be transported from a place of dark 
and damp and heat to the strange outer regions of the 
surface-world. 

Plainly he saw it would be a task of unparalleled skill, 
delicacy, and difficult accomplishment; but his spirits rose 
only the higher as he faced its actual details. After all 
that he and Beatrice had been through since their wakening in the tower, he feared no failure to solve any questions 
that now might rise. By care, by keeping the Folk at first 
in caves, then gradually accustoming them to stronger and 
brighter light, more air, more cold, he knew he could bridge 
the gap of centuries in a few years. 

Ever adaptable, the human body would respond to 




432 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

changed environments. Patience and time  th'ese would 
solve all f 

And as for this Folk's barbarism, it mattered not. Much 
better such stock to rebuild from than some mild, supine 
race of far higher culture. To fight the rough battles of 
life and re-establishment still ahead, the bold and warlike 
Merucaans were all that he could wish. 

" Imagine me as a school-teacher/' suddenly exclaimed 
the girl, laughing: "giving the children ABC and making them read:  I see the cat'  when there aren't any cats 
nowadays  no tame ones, anyhow ! Imagine  " 

" Sh-h'h! " cautioned Stem. " Don't waste your energies 
imagining things just yet. There's more than enough real 
work, food-getting, house-building in caves, and all that, before we ever get to schools. That's years ahead yet, education is ! " 

Silence again, save for the strong and ceaseless chatter 
of the engine, that, noisy as a score of mowing machines, 
flung its indomitable challenge to gravitation out into the 
fathomless void on every hand. 

" Allan ! Allan ! Oh, a star ! Look, look ! A start " 
The girl was first to see that blest and wondrous thing. 
Hours had passed, long, weary hours ; steadily the air-pressure had sunk, the vapors thinned; but light had not yet 
filtered through the mists. And Allan's mind had been sore 
troubled thereat. He had not thought of the simple reason that they were reaching the surface at night. 

But now he knew, and as she cried to him "A star! 
he, too, looked and saw it, and as though he had been a 
little child he felt the sudden tears start to his weary eyes. 
"A star!" he answered. "Oh, thank God a star!'' 
It faded almost at once, as vapors shrouded it; but soon 
it came again, and others, many more; and now the first 
breath of the cool and blessed outer air was wafted to 
them. 

Used as they had been, all these long months  for now 



 

4( 



THE SUN OF SPRING 433 

the year had turned again and early spring was coming 
up the world  used to the closed and stifling atmosphere 
of the Abyss, its chemicalized fogs and mists, the first effect 
of the pure surface-air was almost intoxicating as they 
mounted higher, higher, toward the lip of the titanic gulf. 

The patriarch, trembling with eagerness and with exhaustion  for he was very old and now his vital forces 
were all but spent  breathed it only with difficulty. Rapid 
was his respiration; on either pallid cheek a strange and 
vivid patch of color showed. 

Suddenly he spoke. 
Stars? You see them  really see them?" faltered he. 

Oh, for my sight again! Oh, that I might see them 
once, only once, those wonderful things of ancient story! 
Then, verily, I should be glad to die ! " 

Midnight. 

Hard-driven now for many hours, heated, yet still running true, the Pauillac had at length made a safe landing 
on the western verge of the Abyss. Again the voyagers felt 
solid earth beneath their feet. By the clear starlight Stem 
had brought the machine to earth on a little plateau, wooded 
in pawl:, partly bare sand. Numb and stiff, he had alighted 
from the driver's seat, and had helped both passengers 
alight. 

The girl, radiant with joy, had kissed him full upon the 
lips; the patriarch had fallen on his knees, and, gathering 
a handful of the sand  the precious surface of the earth, 
long fabled among his Folk, long worshipped in his deepest 
reveries  had clasped it to his thin and heaving breast. 

If he had known how to pray he would have worshipped 
there. But even though his lips were silent, his attitude, 
his soul were all one vast and heartfelt prayer  prayer to 
the mother-earth, the unseen stars, the night, the wind 
upon his brow, the sweet and subtle airs of heaven that 
enfolded him like a caress. 

Stern wrapped the old man in a spare mantle, for the 



i 




434 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

night was chill, then made a crackling fire on the sands. 
Worn out, they rested, all. Little they said. The beauty 
and majesty of night now  seen again after long absence  
a hundred times more solemn than they had ever known it, 
kept the two Americans from speech. And the old man, 
buried in his own thoughts, sat by the fire, burning with a 
fever of impatient longings for the dawn. 

Five o'clock. 

Now all across, the eastern sky, shrouded as it was with 
the slow, silent mist-wreaths rising ghostly from the Abyss, 
delicate pink and pearl-gray tints were spreading, shading 
above to light blues and to purples of exquisite depth and 
clarity. 

No cloud flecked the sky, the wondrous sky of early 
spring. Dawn, pure as on the primal day, was climbing from 
the eastern depths. And, thrilled by that eternal miracle, 
the man and woman, hand in hand, awaited the full coming of the light. 

The patriarch spoke. 

" Is the sun nigh arisen now ? " he queried in a strange, 
awed voice, trembling with eagerness and deep emotion. 
" Is it coming, at last  the sun ? " 

" It'll be here now before long, father," answered Stem. 

" From which direction does it come? Am I facing it?" 
he asked, with pitiful anxiety. 

" You're facing it. The first rays will fall on you. Only 
be patient. I promise you it shall not fail ! " 

A pause. Then the aged man spqke again. 

" Remember, oh, my children," said he, with terrible 
earnestness, "all that I have told you, all that you must 
know. Remember how to deal with my people. They are 
as children in your hands. Be very patient, very firm and 
wise; all will be well. 

" Remember my warnings of the Great Vortex, so very 
far below our sea, the Lanskaarn, and all those other perils 
of the Abyss whereof I have spoken. Remember, too, all 



THESUNOFSPRING 435 

the traditions of the Cave of Records. Some day, when all 
else is accomplished, you may find that cave. 1 have told 
you everything I know of its location. Seek it some day, 
and find the history of the dead, buried past, from the time 
of the great catastrophe to the final migration when my 
ancestors sought the lower sea." 

Another silence. All three were too deeply moved for 
any speech. And ever mounting higher, brighter and more 
clear, dawn flung its glories wide across the sky. 

" Help me that I may stand, to greet the day! " at last 
the patriarch said. " I cannot rise, alone." 

Stern and the girl, each taking an arm, got him to his 
feet. He stood there facing the east, priestJike in venerable 
and solemn worship of the coming sun. 

" Give me each a hand, my children," he commanded. In 
Stern's hand, strong, corded, toil-worn, he laid the girl's. 

"Thus do I give you each to each," said he. "Thus 
do I make you one 1 " 

Stem drew Beatrice into his arms. Blind though the 
old man was, he sensed the act, and smiled. A great and 
holy peace had shrouded him. 

" Only that I may fee! the sun upon my face ! " breatlied 
he. 

All at once a thinning cloud-haze let the light glow 
through. 

Beatrice looked at Stern. He shook his head. 

" Not yet," he answered. 

Swiftly uprose the sun. The morning wind dispelled the 
shrouding vapors. 

" Oh, what is this warmth ? " exclaimed the patriarch, 
trembling violently. " What is this warmth, this glow upon 
my face? This life, this" 

Out toward the east he stretched both hands. Instinctively 
the priestlike worship of the sun, old when the world was 
still in infancy, surged back to him again after the long, 
lost centuries of darkness and oblivion. 



i 




436 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" The sun ! The sun! " he cried, his voice triumphant as 
a trumpet-call. Tears coursed from his blind eyes; but 
on his lips a smile of joy unutterable was set. 

"The sun I At last I The' 

Stem caught his feeble body as he fell. 

Down on the sands they laid him. To the stilled heart 
Stem laid his ear. 

Tears were in his eyes, too, and in the girl's, as Stem 
shook his head, silently. 

Up over the time-wom, the venerable, the kindly face 
they drew the mantle, but not before each had reverently 
kissed the wrinkled forehead. 

" Better thus/' whispered the engineer. " Far better, 
every way. He had his wish; he felt the sunshine on his 
face; his outgoing spirit must be mingled with that worshipped light and air and sky  with dawn  with springtime" 

" With life itself I " said Beatrice. 

And through her tears she smiled, while higher rose the 
warm, life-giving sun of spring. 




BOOK III 



THE AFTER GLOW 



f 






M 



DEATH, LIFE, AND LOVE 



Life I Life again, and light, the sun and the fresh winds 
of heaven, the perfect azure of a June sky, the perfume of 
the passionate red blooms along the lips of the chasm, the 
full-throated song of hidden birds within the wood to 
eastward  life, beauty, love  such, the sunrise hour when 
Allan and the girl once more stood side by side in the outer 
world, delivered from the perils of the black Abyss. 

Hardly more real than a disordered nightmare now, the 
terrible fall into those depths, the captivity among the white 
barbarians, the battles and the ghastly scenes of war, the 
labors, the perilous escape. 

All seemed to fall and fade away from these two lovers, 
all save their joy in life and in each other, their longing 
for the inevitable greater passion, pain and joy, their cleareyed outlook into the vast and limitless possibilities of the 
future, their future and the world's. 

And as they stood there, hand in hand beside the body of 
the fallen patriarch  he whose soul had passed in peace, 
even at the moment of his life's fulfilment, his knowledge 
of the sun  awe overcame them both. With a new tenderness, mingled with reverent adoration. Stern drew the 
girl once more to him. 

Her face turned up to his and her arms tightened about 
his neck. He kissed her brow beneath the parted masses 
of her wondrous hair. His lips rested a moment on her 
eyes; and then his mouth sought hers and burned its passion into her very soul. 

439 



 



i 




440 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Suddenly she pushed him back, panting. She had gone 
white; she trembled in his clasp. 

 Oh, your kiss  oh, Allan, what is this I feel?  it seems 
to choke me ! " she gasped, clutching her full bosom where 
her heart leaped like a prisoned creature. " Your kiss  it 
is so different now! No, no  not again  not yet!'' 

He released her, for he, too was shaking in the grip of 
new, fierce passions. 

 Forgave me ! " he whispered. " I  I foigot myself, a 
moment. Not yet  no, not yet. You're right, Beatrice. A 
thousand things are pressing to be done. And love  most 
wait!" 

He clenched his fists and strode to the edge of the chasm, 
where, for a while, he stood alone and silent, gazing far 
down and away, mastering himself, striving to get himself 
in leash once more. 

Then suddenly he turned and smiled. 

" Come, Beta," said he. " All this must be forgotten. 
Let's get to work. The whole world's waiting for us, for 
our labor. It's eager for our toil ! " 

She nodded. In her eyes the fire had died, and now 
only the light of comradeship and trust and hope glowed 
once again. 

"Allan?" 

"Yes?" 

" Our first duty  " She gestured toward the body of the 
patriarch, nobly still beneath the rough folds of the mantle 
they had drawn over it. 

He understood. 

" Yes," murmured he. " And his grave shall be for all 
the future ages a place of pilgrimage and solemn thought 
Where first, one of lost Folk issued again into the world 
and where he died, this shall be a monument of the new 
time now coming to its birth. 

" His grave shall lie here on this height, where the first 



DEATH, LIFE AND LOVE 441 

son shall each day for ages (all upon it, supreme in its deep 
symbolism. Forever it shall be a memorial, not of death, 
but life, of liberty, of hope!" 

They kept a moment's silence, then Stem added. 

" So now, to work ! " From the biplane he fetched the ax. 
With this he cut and trimmed a branch from a near-by fir. 
He sharpened it to a flat blade three or four inches across. 
In the deep red sand along the edge of the Abyss he set 
to work, scooping the patriarch's grave. 

In silence Beatrice took the ax and also labored, throwii the sand away. Together, in an hour, they had dug a 
trench sufficiently deep and wide. 

"This must do, for now," said Stern, looking up at last. 
" Some time he shall have fitting burial, but for the present 
we can do no more. Let us now commit his body to the 
earth, the Great -Mother which created and which watts 
always to give everlasting sleep, peace, rest." 

Together, silently, they bore him to the grave, still 
wrapped in the cloak which now had become his shroud. 
Once more they gazed upon the noble face of him they had 
grown to love in the long weeks of the Abyss, when only 
he had understood them or seemed near. 

"What is this, Allan? " asked the girl, touching a fine 
chain of gold about the patriarch's neck, till now unnoticed. 

Allan drew at the chain, and a small golden cylinder was 
revealed, curiously carven. Its liglitness told him it was 
hollow. 

" Some treasure of his, I imagine," judged he. 

" Some record, perhaps? Oughtn't we to look?" 

He thought a moment in silence, then detached the chain. 

" Yes," said he. " It can't help him now. It may help 
us. He himself would have wanted us to have it." 

And into the pocket of his rough, brown cassock, woven 
of the weed-fiber of the dark sea, he slid the chain and 
golden cylinder. 

A final kiss they gave the patriarch, each; then, carefully 




442 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

wrapping his face so that no smallest particle of sand should 
come in contact with it, stood up. At each other they 
gazed, understandingly. 

" Flowers? Some kind of service?" asked the girl. 

" Yes. All we can do for him will be too little I " 

Together they brought armfuls of the brilliant crimson 
and purple blooms along the edge of the sands, where forest 
and barren irregularly met; and with these, fir and spruce 
boughs, the longer to keep his grave freshly green. 

All about him they heaped the blossoms. The patriarch 
lay at rest among beauties he never had beheld, colors and 
fragrances that to him had been but dim traditions of 
antiquity. 

" I can't preach," said Stem. " I'm not that kind, anyway, and in this new world all that sort of thing is out 
of place. Let's just say good-by, as to a friend gone on 
a long, long journey." 

Beatrice could no longer keep back her grief. Kneeling 
beside the grave, she arranged the flowers and the evergreens, on which her tears fell shining. 

" Dust unto dust ! " Stem said. " To you, oh Mother 
Nature, we give back the body of this friend, your soil 
May the breeze blow gently here, the sun shine warm, and 
the birds forever sing his requiem. And may those who 
shall come after us, when we too sleep, remember that in 
him we had a friend, without whom the world never again 
could have hoped for any new birth, any life! To him 
we say good-by eternally ! Dust unto dust; good-by!' 

"Good-by!" whispered the girl. Then, greatly overcome, she arose and walked away. 

Stern, with his naked hands, filled the shallow grave and, 
this done, rolled three large boulders onto it, to protect it 
from the prowling beasts of the wild. 

Beatrice returned. They strewed more flowers and green 
boughs, and in silence stood a while, gazing at the lowly 
bed of their one friend on earth. 



DEATH, LIFE AND LOVE 443 

Suddenly Stem took her hand and drew her toward him. 

" Come, come, Beatrice," said he, " he is not dead, 
He still lives in our memories. His body, aged and full of 
pain, is gone, but his spirit still sur\ives in us  that indomitable sold which, buried alive in blindness and the dark, still 
strove to keep alive the knowledge and traditions of the 
upper world, hopes of attaining it, and visions of a better 
time to be! 

"Was ever greater human courage, faith or strength? 
Let us not grieve. Let us rather go away strengthened 
and inspired by this wonderful Ufe that has just passed. 
In us. let all his hopes and aspirations come to reality. 

" His death was happy. It was as he wished it, Beatrice, 
for his one great ambition was fully granted  to know the 
reality of the upper world, the winds of heaven and the sunl 
Impossible for him to have survived the great change. 
Death was inevitable and right. He wanted rest, and rest 
is his, at last. 

" We must be true to all he thought us, you and I  to 
all he believed us, even demigods! He shall inspire and 
enlighten us, O my love ; and with his memory to guide us, 
faith and fortitude shall not be lacking. 

" Now, we must go. Work waits for us. Everything is 
yet to be planned and done. The world and its redemption 
lie before us. Comel " 

He led the girl away. As by mutual understanding they 
returned to where the biplane lay, 5)'mbol of their conquest 
of nature, epitome of hopes. 

Near it, on the edge of the Abyss, they rested, hand in 
hand. In silence they sat thinking, for a space. And ever 
higher and more warmly burned the sun; the breeze of June 
was sweet to them, long-used to fogs and damp and dark; 
the boundless flood of light across the azure thrilled them 
with aspiration and with joy. 

Life had begvm again for them and for the world, life, 
even there in the presence of death. Life was continuing, 
developing, expanding  life and its immortal sister. Love! 




CHAPTER II 

EASTWARD HO! 

Practical matters now for a time thrust intro)ectiOfi, 
dreams and sentiment aside. The morning was already 
half spent, and in spite of sorrow, hunger had begun to 
assert itself; for since time was, no two such absolutely 
vigorous and healthy humans had ever set foot oa earth as 
Beatrice and Allan. 

The man gathered brush and dry-kye and proceeded to 
make a fire, not far from the precipice, but well out of 
sight of the patriarch's grave. He fetched a genero u s 
heap of wood from the neighboring forest, and presently 
a snapping blaze flung its smoke-banner down the breese. 

Soon after Beatrice had raided the supplies on board the 
Pauillac  fish, edible seaweed, and the eggs of the strange 
birds of the Abyss  and with the skill and speed of long 
experience was getting an excellent meal. Allan meantime brought water from a spring near by. And the two 
ate in silence, cross-legged on the warm, dry sand. 

"What first, now?' queried the man, when they were 
satisfied. " Fve been thinking of about fifteen hundred 
separate things to tackle, each one more important than all 
the others put together. How are we going to bin again? 
That's the question ! " 

She drew from her warm bosom the golden cylinder and 
chain. 

" Before we make any move at all," she answered, " I 
think we ought to see what's in this record  if it if a 
record. Don't you ? " 

" By Jove, you're right ! Shall I open it for you ? " 



444 



EASTWARD HO ! 445 

But already the massively chased top lay unscrewed in 
her hand. Within the cylinder a parchment roll appeared. 

A moment later she had spread it on her knee, taking 
care not to tear the ancient, crackling skin whereon faint 
lines of writing showed. 

Stem bent forward, eager and breathless. The girl, too, 
gazed with anxious eyes at the dim script, all but illegible 
with age and wear. 

" You're right, Allan," said she, " This is some kind 
of record, some direction as to the final history of the few 
survivors after the great catastrophe. Oh! Iok, Allan  
it's fading already in the sunlight. Quick, read it quick, 
or we shall lose it all 1 " 

Only too true. The dim lines, perhaps fifteen hundred 
years old, certainly never exposed to sunlight since more 
than a thousand, were already growing weaker; and the 
parchment, too, seemed crumbling into diist. Its edges, 
where her fingers held it, already were brealiing away into 
a fine, impalpable powder. 

"Quick, Allan! Quick 1" 

Together they read the clumsy scrawl, their eyes leaping 
along the lines, striving to grasp the meaning ere it were 
too late, 

TO ANY WHO AT ANY TIME MAY EVER REVISIT THE UPPER WORLD: Be it known that two 
records have been left covering our history from the time 
of the cataclysm in 1920 till we entered the Chasm in 1957. 
One is in the Great Cave in Medicine Bow Range, Colorado, near the ruins of Dexter, Exact location, 106 degrees, 
1 1 minutes, 3 seconds west ; 40 degrees, 22 minutes, 6 seconds north. Record is in left, or northern branch of Cave, 
327 yards from mouth, on south wall, 4 feet 6 inches from 
floor. The other  



"Where? Where?" cried Beatrice. A portion of the 
record was gone ; it had crumbled even as they read, 



y 



/ 




446 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" Easy does it, girl ! Don't get excited," Allan cauticMiedy 
but his face was pale and his hand trembled as he sought 
to steady and protect the parchment from the breeze. 

Together they pieced out a few of the remaining words, 
for now the writing, was but a pale blur, momently becoming dimmer and more dim. 

. . . Cathedral on . . . known as Storm King . , . 
River . . . crypt tmder .  . this was agreed on    
never returned but may possibly    signed by us on 
this 1 2th day . .  

They could read no more, for now the record was but a 
disintegrating shell in the girl's hands, and even as they 
looked the last of the writing vanished, as breath evaporates 
from a widow-pane. 

Allan whirled toward the fire, snatched out a still-glowing stick, and in the sand traced figures. 

" Quick ! What was that ? 106-1 1-3, West Forty " 

" Forty, 22, north," she prompted. 

"How many seconds? You remember?" 

" No." Slowly she shook her head. " Five, wasn't it?  

Eagerly he peered at the record, but every trace was gone. 

" Well, no matter about the seconds," he judged. " 111 
enter these data on our diary, in the Pauillac, anyhow. Wc 
can remember the ruins of Dexter and Medicine Bow 
Range; also the cathedral on Storm King. Put the fragments of the parchment back into the case. Beta. Maybe we 
can yet preserve them, and by some chemical means or 
other bring out the writing again. As it is, I guess we've 
got the most important facts ; enough to go on, at any rate.' 

She replaced the crumbled record in the golden cylinder 
and once more screwed on the cap. Allan got up and walked 
to the aeroplane, where, among their scanty effects, was 
the brief diary and set of notes he had been keeping since 
the great battle with the Lanskaam. 

Writing on his fish-skin tablets, with his bone stylus 



EASTWARD HO ! 447 

dipped in his little stone jar of cuttle-fish ink, he carefully 
recorded the geographical location. Then he went back to 
Beatrice, who still sat in the midmorning sunlight by the 
fire, very beautiful and dear to him. 

" If we can find those records, we'll have made a long 
step toward solving the problem of how to handle the Folk. 
They aren't exactly what one wouM call an amenable tribe, 
at best. We need their history, even the little of it that the 
records must contain, for surely there must be names and 
events in them of great value in our work of tryingito bring 
these people to the surface and recivilize them," 

"Well, what's to hinder our getting the records now?" 
she asked seriously, with wonder in her gray and level gaze. 

" That, for one thing 1 " I 

He gestured at the Abyss.  

" It's a good six or seven hundred miles wide, and we already know how deep it is. I don't think we want to risk 
trying to cross it again and running out of fuel tK route! 
Volplaning down to the village is quite a different proposition from a straight-away flight across ! " 

She sat pensive a moment. 

" There must be some way around,',' said she at last. 
" Otherwise a party of survivors couldn't have set out for 
Storm King on the Hudson to deposit a set of records 
there ! " 

"That's so, too. But  remember? 'Never returned." I 
figure it this way: A party of the survivors probably started 
for New York, exploring. The big, concrete cathedral on 
Storm King  it was new in 1916, you remember  was 
known the country over as the most massive piece of architecture this side of the pyramids. They must have planned 
to leave one set of records there, in case the east, too. was 
devastated. Well  " 

" Do you suppose they succeeded? " 

" No telling. At any rate, there's a chance of it. And as 
for this Rocky Mountain cache, that's manifestly out of the 
question, for now." 



 




448 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" So then ? " she queried eagerly. 

" So then our job is to strike for Storm King. Incidentally we can revisit Hope Villa, our bungalow on the 
banks of the Hudson. It's been a year since we left it, almost  ten months, at any rate. Gad! What marvels and 
miracles have happened since then, Beta  what perils, what 
escapes! Wouldn't you like to see our little nest again? 
We could rest up and plan and strengthen ourselves for the 
greater tasks ahead. And then  " 

He paused, a change upon his face, his eyes lighting with 
a sudden glow. She saw and tmderstood; and her breast 
rose with sudden keen emotion. 

" You mean, " whispered she, "in our own home?'' 

' Where better?" 

She paled as, kneeling beside her, he flung a powerful arm 
about her, and pulled her to him, breathing heavily. 

" Don't ! Don't ! " she forbade. " No, no, Allan there's 
so much work to do  you mustn't I " 

To her a vision rose of dream-children  strong sons and 
daughters yet unborn. Their eyes seemed smiling, their 
fingers closing on hers. Cloudlike, yet very real, they beckoned her, and in her stirred the call of motherhood of life 
to be. Her heart-strings echoed to that harmony ; it seemed 
already as though a tiny head, downy-soft, was nestling in 
her bosom, while eager lips quested, quested. 

"No, Allan I No!" 

Almost fiercely she flung him back and stood up. 

" Come ! " said she. " Let us start at once. Nothing remains for us to do here. Let us go home! " 

An hour later the PauiUac spiralled far aloft, above the 
edge of the Abyss, then swept into its eastward tangent, and 
in swift, droning flight rushed toward the longed-for place 
of dreams, of rest, of love. 

Before them stretched infinities of labor and tremendous 
struggle ; but for a little space they knew they now were free 
for this, the consummation of their dreams, of all their 
hopes, their happiness, their joy. 



CHAPTER m 

CATASTROPHE I  

Toward five o'clock next afternoon, from the swooping 
back of the air-dragon they sighted a far blue ribbon winding 
among wooded heights, and knew Hudson once more 
lay before them. 

The girl's heart leaped for joy at thought of once again 
seeing Hope Villa, the beach, the garden, the sun-dial  all 
the thousand and one little happy and pleasant things that, 
made by them in the heart of the vast wilderness, had 
brought them such intimate and unforgctable delight. 

"There it is, Allan!" cried she, poinlhig, "There's the 
river again. We'll soon be home now  home again ! " 

He smiled and nodded, watchful at the wheel, and swung 
the biplane a little to southward, in the direction where he 
judged the bungalow must lie. 

Weary they both were, yet full of life and strength. The 
trip from the chasm had been tedious, merely a long succession of hours in the rushing air, with unbroken forest, 
hills, lakes, rivers, and ever more forest steadily rolling 
away to westward like a vast carpet a thousand feet below, 

No sign of man, no life, no gap in nature's all-emhracing 
sway. Even the occasional heap of ruins marking the grave 
of some forgotten city served only to intensify the old halfterror they had felt, when flying for the first time, at thought 
of the tremendous desolation of the world. 

The shining plain of Lake Erie had served the first day 
as a landmark to keep them true to their course. 

That night they had stopped at the ruins of Buffalo, where 

449 y" 




450 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

 

they had camped in the open, and where next morning Stem 
had fully replenished his fuel-tanks with the usual supplies 
of alcohol from the debris of two or three large drug 
stores. 

From Buffalo eastward, over almost the same course along 
which the hurricane of ten months ago had driven them, 
battling at random with the gale, they steered by the com 
pass. Toward mid-morning they saw a thin line of smoke 
arising in the far north, answered by still another on the 
hills beyond, but to these signs they gave no heed. 

Already they had seen and scorned them during their first 
stay at the bungalow. They felt that nothing more was to 
be seriously feared from such survivors of the Horde as 
had escaped the great Battle of the Tower  a year and a 
half previously. 

' Those chaps won't bother us again ; I'm sure of that ! " 
said Allan, nodding toward the smoke-columns that rose, 
lazily blue, on the horizon. " The scare we threw into them 
in Madison Forest will last them one while !  

Still in this confident, defiant mood it was that they sighted 
the river again and watched it rapidly broaden as the Pauillac, in a long series of flat arcs, spumed the June air and 
whirled them onward toward their goal. 

Nearer the Hudson drew, and nearer still; and now its 
untroubled azure, calm save for a few cat's-paws of breeze 
that idled on the surface, stretched almost beneath them in 
their rapid flight. 

" We're still a little too far north, I see," the man judged, 
and swept the biplane round to southward. 

The ruins of Newburgh lay presently upon their right 
Soon after the crumbled walls of West Point's pride slid 
past in silence, save for the chatter of the engines, the whirling roar of the propeller-blades' vast energy. 

No boat now vexed the flood. Upon its bosom neither 
steam nor sail now plowed a furrow. Along the banks 
no speeding train flung its smoke-pennant to the wind. 
Primeval silence, universal cahn, wrapped all things. 



CATASTROPHE 451 

Beatrice shuddered slightly. Now that they were Hearing " home " the desolation seemed more appalHng. 

' Oh, Allan, is it possible all this will ever be peopled 
again  alive?" 

" Certain to be 1 Once we get those records and begin 
transplanting the Merucaans, the rest will be only a matter 
of time I " 

She made no answer, but in her eyes shone pride that he 
could know such visions, have such faith. 

Already they recognized the ruins of Nyack, and beyond 
them the point in the river behind which, they knew, lay 
Hope Villa, nestling in its gardens, its little sphere of cultivation hewn from the very heart of the dense wilderness. 

Allan slackened speed, crossed to the eastern bank, and 
jockeyed for a safe landing, 

The point slipped backward and away. There, right 
ahead, they caught a glimpse of the long white beach where 
they had fished and bathed and built their boat-house, and 
whence in their little yawl they had ten months before 
started on their trip of exploration  a trip destined to end 
so strangely in the Abyss. 

" Home! Home! "' cried Beta, the quick tears starting to 
her lids. " Oh, home again 1 " 

Already the great plane was swooping downward toward the beach, hardly a mile away, when a harsh shout 
escaped the man, 

" Look ! Canoes ! My God  what  " 

As the drive of the Pauillac opened up the concave of 
the sand and brought its whole length to view. Stern and 
the girl suddenly became aware of trouble. 

There, strung along the beach irregularly, they alt at 
once made out ten, twenty, thirty boats. Still afar, they 
could see these were the same rough bancas such as they 
had seen after the battle  bancas in one of which they two 
had escaped up-river! 

"Boats! The Horde again.'" 

Even as he shouted a tiny, black, misshapen little figure 



/ 




452 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

ran crouching out onto the sand. Another followed and a 
third, and now a dozen showed there, very distinct and hideous, upon the white crescent. 

Stem's heart went sick within him. A terrible rage welled 
up  a hate such as he had never believed possible to fed. 

Wild imprecations struggled to be voiced. He snapped 
his lips together in a thin line, his eyes narrowed, and his 
face went gray. 

' The infernal little beasts ! " he gritted. " Tried to trap 
us in the tower  cut our boat loose afterward  and now 
invading us! Don't know when they're licked, the swine 1 ' 

Beatrice had lost her color now. Milk-white her face 
was ; her eyes grew wide with terror ; she strove to speak, 
but could not. 

Her hand went out in a wild, repelling gesture, as though 
by the very power of her love for home she could protect 
it now against the incursion of these foul, distorted, inhuman little monsters. 

Stern acted quickly. He had been about to cut off power 
and coast for the beach; but now he veered suddenly to 
eastward again, rotated the rising-plane, and brought the 
Pauillac up at a sharp tilt. Banking, he advanced the spark 
a notch ; the engine shrilled a half-tone higher, and with increased speed the aero lifted them bravely in a long and 
rising swoop. 

He snatched his automatic from its holster on his hip and 
as the plane swept past the beach, down-stream, let fly a 
spatter of steel- jacketed souvenirs at the fast-thickening 
pack on the sand. 

Far up to the girl and him, half heard through the clatter of the motors, they sensed a thin, defiant, barbarous 
yell  a yapping chorus, bestial and horrible. 

Again Stern fired. 

He could see quick spurts of water jet up along the edge 
of the sand, and one of the creatures fell, but this was only 
a chance shot. 

At that distance, firing from a swift-skimming plane, he 



CATASTROPHE 453 

knew he could do no execution, and with a curse slid the 
pistol back again into its place. 

" Oh, for a dirigible and a few Pulverite bombs, same as 
we had in the tower 1 '' he wished. " I'd clean the blighters 
out mighty quick ! " 

But now Beatrice was pointing, with a cry of dismay, 
down, away at the bungalow itself, which had for a moment 
become visible at the far end of the clearing as the Fauillac 
scudded past. 

Even as Stern thought: "Odd, but they're not afraid of 
us  a flying-machine means nothing to them, does not terrify them as it would human savages. They're too debased 
even to feel fear ! "  even as this thought crossed his brain 
he, too, saw the terrible thing that the girl had cried out 
at sight of. 

" My God ! " he shouted. " This  this is too much t " 

AH about the bungalow, their home, the scene of such 
happy hours, so many dreams and hopes, such heart-enthralling labors, hundreds of the Horde were swarming. 

Like vicious parasites attacking prey, they overran the 
garden, the grounds, even the house itself. 

As in a flash. Stern knew all his work of months must 
be undone  the fruit-trees he had rescued from the forest 
be cut down or broken, the bulbs and roots in the garden 
uptom, even the hedges and fences trampled flat 

Worse still, the bungalow was being destroyed ! Rather, 
its contents, since the concrete walls defied the venomous 
troop. 

They knew, at any rate, the use of fire, and not so swiftly 
skimmed the Pauillac as to prevent both Stern and Beatrice 
seeing a thin but ominous thread of smoke out-curling on 
the June air from one of the living-room windows. 

With an imprecation of unutterable hate and rage, yet 
impotent to stay the ravishment of Hope Villa, Stern 
brought the machine round in a long spiral. 

For a moment the wild, suicidal idea possessed him to 
land on the beach, after all, and charge the little slate-blue 




454 DARKNESS A'ND DAWN 

devils who had evidently piled all the furnishings together 
in the bungalow and were now burning them. 

He longed for slaughter now ; he lusted blood  the blood 
of the Anthropoid pack which from the beginning had 
hung upon his flank and been as a thorn unto his flesh. 

He seemed to feel the joy of rushing them, an automatic 
in each hand spitting death, just as he had mown down 
the Lanskaarn in the Battle of the Wall, down below in 
the Abyss. Even though he knew the inevitable end  a 
poisoned spear-thrust, a wound with one of those terribly 
envenomed arrows  he felt no fear. 

Revenge! If he could only feel its sweetness, death had 
no terrors. 

Common sense instantly sobered him and dispelled these 
vain ideas. The bungalow, after all, was not vital to his 
future or the girl's. Barring the set of encyclopedias on 
metal plates, everything else could be replaced with sufficient 
labor. Only a madman would risk a fight with such a Horde 
in company with a woman. 

Not now were he and Beatrice entrenched in a strong 
tower, with terrible explosives. Now they were in the open, 
armed only with revolvers. For the present there was no 
redress. 

" Beta," cried he, " we're up against it this time for fair 
and we can't hit back ! " 

Our bungalow ! Our precious home ! " 
I know." He saw that she was crying: "It's a rotten shame and all that, but it isn't fatal." 

He brought the Pauillac down-wind again, coasting high 
over the bungalow, whence smoke now issued ever more and 
more thickly. 

' WeVe simply hamstrung this time, that's all. Where 

those devils have come from and how many there may be, 

God knows. Thousands, perhaps ; the woods may be full of 

em. It's lucky for us they didn't attack while we were 

there ! 



It 



CATASTROPHE 455 

" Now  well, the only thing to do is let 'cm have their 
way for the present. Eventually  " 

" Oh, can't we ever get rid of the horrid little beasts for 
good?" 

" We can and will ! " He spoke very grimly, soaring the 
machine still higher over the river and once more coming 
round above the upper end of the beach. " One of these 
days there's got to be a final reckoning, but not yet ! " 

" So it's good-by to Hope Villa, Allan ? There's no 
way ? " 

" It's good-by. Humanly speaking, none." 

" Couldn't we land, blockade ourselves in the boat-house, 
and  " 

Her eyes sparkled with the boldness of the plan  its 
peril, its possibilities. But Allan only shook his head. 

"And expose the Pauillac on the beach?" he asked. 
" One good swing with a war-club into the motor and then 
a week's siege and slow starvation, with a final rush  
interesting, but not practical, little girl. No, no; the better 
part of valor is to recognize force majeure and wail! Remember what we've said already? ' Je recule pour mieux 
sautcrf ' Wait till we get a fresh start on these hell-hounds ; 
we'll jump 'cm far enough!" 

The bungalow now lay behind. The whole clearing seemed 
alive with the little blue demons, like vermin crawling everywhere. Thicker and thicker now the smoke was pouring 
upward. The scene was one of utter desolation. 

Then suddenly it faded. The plane had borne its riders 
onward and away from the range of vision. Again only 
dense forest lay below, while to eastward sparkled the broad 
reach where, in the first days of their happiness at Hope 
Villa, the girl and Allan had fished and bathed. 

Her tears were unrestrained at last ; but Allan, steadying 
the wheel with one hand, drew an arm about her and kissed 
and comforted her. 

" There, there, little girl ! The world's not ended yet, 
even if they have burned up our home-made mission fumi


f 




456 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

turc ! Come, Beatrice, no tears  we'vc other things to think 
of now ! " 

" Where away, since our home's gone? " she queried pitifully. 

" Where away ? Why, Storm King, of course ! And the 
cathedral and the records, and  and   



TO-MORROW IS OUR WEDDING-DAY 

Purple and gold the light of that dying day still glowed 
across the western sky when the standi old Pauillac, heated 
yet throbbing with power, skimmed the last league and 
swung the last great bend of the river that hid old Storm 
King from the wanderers' eager sight. 

Stem's eyes brightened at vision of that vast, rugged 
headland, forest-clad and superb in the approaching twilight. Beatrice, weary now and spent  for the long journeys, the excilemenls and griefs of the day had worn her 
down despite her strength  paled a litlle and grew pensive 
as the massive structure of the cathedral loomed against the 
sky-line. 

What thoughts were hei now that the goal lay near  
what longings, fears and hopes, what exuhation and what 
pain? She shivered slightly; but perhaps the evening coolness at that height had pierced her cloak. Her hands clasped 
tightly, she tried to smile but could not. 

Allan could notice nothing of all this. His gaze was 
anxiously bent on the earth below, to find a landing for 
the great machine. He skimmed the broad brow of the 
mountain, hardly a hundred feet above the spires of the 
massive concrete pile that still reared itself steadfastly upon 
the height facing the east. 

All about it the dense unbroken forest sprea<I impenetrable to the eye. Below the bold breast of the cliff a narrow 
strip of beach appeared. 

" Hard job to land, that's one sure thing! " exclaimed the 

4s; 



f 




458 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

man, peering at the inhospitable contours of the land. " No 
show to make it on top of the mountain, and if we take the 
beach it means a most tremendous climb up the cliff or 
through the forest on the flank. Here is a situation, Beatrice! Now  ah  see there? Look! that barren ridge to 
westward ! " 

Half a mile back from the river on the western slope of 
the highlands, a spur of Storm King stretched water-worn 
and bare, a sandy spit dotted only sparsely with scrub-pine. 

" It's that, or nothing ! " cried the man, banking in a wide 
sweep. 

 Can you make it ? Even the clearest space at this end 
is terribly short ! " 

Allan laughed and cut off power. In the old days not for 
ten thousand dollars would he have tried so ticklish a descent, but now his mettle was of sterner stuff and his skill 
with the machine developed to a point where man and biplane seemed almost one organism. 

With a swift rush the Pauillac coasted down. He checked 
her at precisely the right moment, as the sand seemed 
whirling up to meet them, swerved to dodge a fire-blasted 
trunk, and with a shout took the earth. 

The plane bounced, creaked, skidded on the long runners 
he had fitted to her, and with a lurch came to rest not ten 
yards from an ugly stump dead ahead. 

" Made it, by Heaven ! " he exulted. " But a few feet 
more and it wouldn't have been  well, no matter. We're 
here, anyhow. Now, supper and a good sleep. And tomorrow, the cathedral I " 

He helped the girl alight, for she was cramped and stiff. 
Presently their camp-fire cheered the down-drawing gloom, 
as so many other times in such strange places. And before 
long their evening meal was in course of preparation, close 
by a great glacial boulder at the edge of the sand-barren. 

In good comradeship they ate, then wheeled the biplane 
over to the rock, and under the shelter of its wide-spreading 
wings made their camp for the night. An hour or so tliejr 



"OUR WEDDING-DAY" 459 

sat talking of many things  their escape from the Abyss, 
the patriarch's death, their trip east again, the loss of their 
little home, their plans, their hopes, their work. 

Beatrice seemed to grieve, more than Stern over the destruction of the bungalow. So much of her woman's heart 
had gone into the making of that nest, so many thoughts 
had centered on a return to it once more, that now when it 
lay in ruins through the spiteful mischief of the Horde, she 
found sorrow knocking insistently at the gates of her soul. 
But Allan comforted her as best he might. 

" Never you mind, little girl 1 " said he bravely. " It's 
only an incident, after all, A year from now another and 
a still more beautiful home will shelter us in some more 
secure location. And there'll be human companionship, too, 
about us. In a year many of the Folk will have been brought 
from the depths. In a year miracles may happen  even the 
greatest one of all 1 " 

Her eyes met his a moment by the ruddy fire-glow and 
held true. 

" Yes," answered she, " even the greatest in the world t " 

A sudden tenderness swept over him at thought of all 
that had been and was still to be, at sight of this woman's 
well-loved face irradiated by the leaping blaze  her face 
now just a little wan with long fatigues and sad as though 
with realization, with some compelling inner sense of vast, 
impending responsibilities. 

He gathered her in his strong arms, he drew her yielding 
body close, and kissed her very gently. 

"To-morrow!" he whispered. "Do you realize it?" 

" To-morrow," she made answer, her breath mingling 
with his. " To-morrow, Allan  one page of life forever 
closed, another opened. Oh, may it be for good  may we 
be very strong and very wise ! " 

Neither spoke for the space of a few heart-beats, while 
the wind made a vague, melancholy music in the sentinel 
tree-tops and the snapping sparks danced upward by the 
rock. 




46o DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" Life, all life  just dancing sparks  then gone ! " said 
Beatrice slowly. "And yet  yet it is good to have lived, 
Allan. Good to have lighted the black mystery of the universe, formless and endless and inscrutable, by even so 
brief a flicker ! ' 

" Is it my little pessimist to-night ? " he asked. " Too 
tired, that's all. In the morning things will look different. 
You must smile, then, Beta, and not think of formless mystery or  or anything sad at all. For to-morrow is our 
wedding-day." 

He felt her catch her breath and tremble just a bit. 

" Yes, I know. Our wedding-day, Allan. Surely the 
strangest since time began. No friends, no gfts, no witnesses, no minister, no~" 

" There, there ! " he interrupted, smiling. " How can my 
little girl be so wrong-headed? Friends? Why, everything's our friend! All nature is our friend  thc whole 
life-process is our friend and ally! Gifts? What need 
have we of gifts? Aren't you my gift, surely the best gift 
that a man ever had since the beginning of all things? Am 
I not yours? 

"Minister? Priest? We need none! The world-to-be 
shall have got far away from such, far beyond its fairy-tale 
stage, its weaknesses and fears of the Unknown, which 
alone explain their existence. Here on Storm King, under 
the arches of the old cathedral our clasped hands, our mtitual words of love and trust and honor  these shall suffice. 
The river and the winds and forest, the sunlight and the 
sky, the whole infinite expanse of Nature herself shall be 
our priest and witnesses. And never has a wedding been 
so true, so solemn and so holy as yours and mine shall be. 
For you are mine, my Beatrice, and I am yours  forever I ' 

A little silence, while the flames leaped higher and the 
shadows deepened in the dim aisles of the fir-forest all 
atout them. In the vast canopy of evening sky clustering 
star-points had begun to shimmer. 

Redly the camp-fire lighted man and woman there alone 



"OUR WEDDING-DAY" 



461 



together in the wild. For them there was no sense of isolation nor any loneliness. She was his world now, and he 
hers. 

Up into his eyes she looked fairly and bravely, and her 
full lips smiled. 

" Forve me, Allan!" she whispered. "It was only a 
mood, that's all. It's passed now  it won't come back. 
Only forgive me, boy ! " 

" My dear, brave girl ! " he murmured, smoothing the 
thick hair back from her brow, " Never complaining, never 
repining, never afraid 1 " 

Their lips met again and for a time the girl's heart 
throbbed on his. 

Afar a wolf's weird, tremulous call drifted down-wind. 
An owl, disturbed in its nocturnal quest, hooted upon the 
slope above to eastward; and across the darkening sky 
reeled an unsteady bat, far larger than in the old days when 
there were cities on the earth and ships upon the sea. 

The fire burned low. Allan arose and flung fresh wood 
upon it. while sheaves of winking light gyrated upward 
through the air. Then he returned to Beatrice and wrapped 
her in his cloak. 

And for a long, long time they both talked of many 
things  intimate, solemn, wondrous things  tctlier in the 
night. 

And the morrow was to be their wedding-day. 



1 




CHAPTER V 

THE SEARCH FOR THE RECORDS 

Morning found them early astir, to greet the glory of June 
sunlight over the shoulder of Storm King. A perfect morning, if ever any one was perfect since the world bah  
soft airs stirring in the forest, golden robins' full-throated 
song, the melody of the scarlet tropic birds they had named 
" fire-birds " for want of any more descriptive title, the 
chatter of gray squirrels on the branches overhead, all 
blent, under a sky of wondrous azure, to tell them of life, 
full and abundant, joyous and kind. 

Two of the squirrels had to die, for breakfast, whjch 
Beta cooked while Allan quested the edges of the wood for 
the ever-present berries. They drank from a fern-embowered spring a hundred yards or so to south of their camp 
in the forest, and felt the vigorous tides of life throb hotly 
through their splendid bodies. 

Allan got together the few simple implements at their 
disposal for the expedition  his ax, a torch made of the 
brown weed of the Abyss, oil-soaked and bound with wire 
that fastened it to a metal handle, and a skin bag of the 
rude matches he had manufactured in the village of the 
Folk. 

" Now then, en marche!" said he at length. "The old 
cathedral and the records are awaiting a morning call from 
us  and there are all the wedding preparations to make as 
well. We've got no time to lose I " 

She laughed happily with a blush and gave him her hand. 

' Lead on, Sir Knight ! " she jested. " I'm yours by 
right of capture and conquest, as in the good old daysl  

462 




SEARCH FOR THE RECORDS 463 



U 



The good new days will have better and higher standards," he answered gravely. " To-day, one age is closed, 
another opened for all time." 

Hand in hand they ascended the barren spur to eastward, 
and presently reached the outposts of the forest that rose 
in dose-ranked majesty over the brow of Storm King. 

Th going proved hard, for with the warmer climate that 
now favored the cotmtry, undergrowth had sprung up far 
more luxuriantly than in the days of the old-time ci\dlization; but Stem and Beatrice were used to labor, and together  he ahead to break or cut a path  they struggled 
through the wood. 

Half an hour's climb brought them to their first dim 
sigt of the massive towers of the cathedral, rising beyond 
the tangle of trees, majestic in the morning sun. 

Soon after they had made their way close up to the 
huge, lichen-crusted walls, and in the shadow of the gigantic 
pile slowly explored round to the vast portals facing eastward over the Hudson. 

 Wonderful work, magnificent proportions and desigfn," 
Stem commented, as they stopped at last on the broad, 
debris-littered steps and drew breath. " Brick and stone 
have long since perished. Even steel has crumbled. But 
concrete seems eternal. Why, the buildings practically intact even today, after ten centuries of absolute abandonment. A week's work with a force of men would quite 
restore it. The damage it's suffered is absolutely insignificant. Concrete. A lesson to be learned, is it not, in our 
rebuilding of the world ? " 

The mighty temple stood, in fact, almost as men had 
left it in the long ago, when the breath of annihilation had 
swept a withering blast over the face of the earth. The 
broad grounds and driveways that had led up to the entrance 
had, of course, long since absolutely vanished under rank 
growths. 

Grass flourfshed in the gutters and on the Gothic finials; 
the gargoyles were bearded with vines and f em-clusters; 




464 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

the flying buttresses and mullions stood green with moss; 
and in the vegetable mold that had for centuries accumulated 
on the steps and in the vestibule  for the oaken doors had 
crumbled to powder  many a bright-flowered plant raised 
its blossoms to the sun. 

The tall memorial windows and the great rose-window 
in the eastern fagade had long since been shattered out of 
their frames by hail and tempest. But the main body of 
the cathedral seemed yet as massively intact as when the 
master-builders of the twentieth century had taken down 
the last scaffold, and when the gigantic organ had first pealed 
its " Laus Deo " through the vaulted apse. 

Together they entered the vast silent space, and  awed 
despite themselves  gazed in wonder at the beauties of this, 
the most magnificent temple ever built in the western hemisphere. 

The marble floor was covered now with windrows of 
dead leaves and pine-spills, and with the litter from myriads of birds'-nests that sheltered themselves on achit raves and galleries, and on the lofty capitals of the fluted 
pillars which rose, vistalike, a hundred feet above the clearstory, spraying out into a wondrous complexity of ribs to 
sustain the marvelous concrete vaultings full two hundred 
feet in air. 

Through the shattered windows broad slants of sunshine 
fell athwart the walls and floor. Swallows chirped and 
twittered far aloft, or winged their swift way through the 
dusky upper spaces, passing at will in or out the muUioned 
gaps whence all the painted glass had long since fallen. 

An air of mystery, of long expectancy seemed brooding 
everywhere; it seemed almost as though the spirit of the 
past were waiting to receive them  waiting now, as it had 
waited, a thousand years, patiently, inexorably, untiringly 
for those to come who should some day reclaim the hidden 
secrets in the crypt, once more awaken human echoes in 
the vault, and so redeem the world. 

" Waiting ! " breathed Stem, as if the thought hung pr


SEARCH FOR THE RECORDS 465 

nant in the very air. " Waiting all these long centuries  
for us! For you, Beatrice, for me! And we are here, at 
last, we of the newer time ; and here we shall be one. The 
symbol of the pillars, mounting, ever mounting toward the 
intinite, the hope of life eternal, the majesty and mystery 
of this great temple, welcome us ! Come ! " 

He took her hand again and now in silence they walked 
forward noiselessly o\er the thick leaf-carpet on the pavement of rare marble. 

" Oh, Allan, I feel so very small in here ! " she whispered, 
drawing close to him. " You and I, all alone in this tremendous place built for thousands  " 

" You and I are the world to-day ! " he answered very 
gravely; and so together they made way toward the vast 
transept, arched with a bewildering lacery of vaultings. 

All save the concrete had long vanished. No traces now 
remained of pews, or railings, altars, pulpits, or any of the 
fittings of the vast cathedral. 

Majestic in its naked strength, the building stood in 
light and shadow, here banded with strong sun, there lost in 
cool purple shade that foiled the eye far up among the 
hanging miracles of the roof. 

At the transept-crossing they stood amazed ; for here 
the flutings ran up five hundred feet inside the stupendous 
central spire, among a marvelous filigree of windows which 
diminished toward the top a lacework as of frost-patterns etched into the solid substance of the fieche. 

" Higher than that, more massive and more beautiful 
the buildings of the future shall arise," said Allan slowly 
after a pause. " But they shall not serve creed or faction. 
They shall be for all mankind, for the great race still to 
come. Beauty shall be its heritage, its right. 

"'And tozrliucss siuUl crowfi the waiting world 
As with a garland of immortal joy! ' 

Bat come, come, Beatrice  there's work to do. The 




466 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

records, girl! We mustn't stand here admiring architecture and dreaming dreams while those records are still 
undiscovered. Down into the crypt we go to dig among 
the relics of a vanished age ! " 

"The crypt, Allan? Where is it?" 

" If I remember rightly  and at the time this cathedral 
was built I followed the plans with some care  the entrance 
is back of the main southern cluster of pillars over there 
at the transept-crossing. Come on, Beta. In a minute we 
can see whether thousand-year-old memories are any good 
or not ! " 

Quickly he led the way, ax and torch in hand, and as they 
rounded the group of massive buttresses whence sprang the 
pillars for the groin-vaults aloft, a cry of satisfaction escaped him, followed by a word of quick astonishment. 

"What is it, Allan?" exclaimed the girl. "Anything 
wrong? Or  " 

The man stood peering with wide eyes; then suddenly 
he knelt and began pawing over the little heap of vegetable drift that had accumulated along the wall. 

" It's here, all right," said he. " There's the door, right 
in front of us  but what I don't understand is  this!" 

" What, Allan? Is there anything wrong?" 

" Not wrong, perhaps, but devilish peculiar I " 

Speaking, he raised his hand to her. The fingers held an 
arrow-head of flint. 

 There's been a battle here, that's sure," said he. " Look, 
spear-points  shattered ! " 

He had already uncovered three obsidian blades. The 
broken tips proved how forcibly they had been driven 
against the stone in the long ago. 

"What? A" 

His fingers closed on a small, hollow shell of gold. 

'' A molar, so help me ! All that's left of some f oiigottca 
white man who fell here, at the door, a thousand years 
ago!" 



"You're right, Allan," she answered. "This certainly 
is a hollow gold crown. Any one can see that, in spite of 
the patina that's formed over the metal. Why  what can 
it all mean?" 

"Search me! The patriarch's record gave the impression that this eastern expedition set out within thirty years 
or so of the catastrophe. Well, in that short time it doesn't 
seem possible there could have developed savages fighting 
with flints and so on. But that there certainly was a battle 
here at this door, and that the cathedral was used as a 
fort against some kind of invasion is positively certain. 

" Why, look at the chips of concrete knocked off the jamb 
of the door here I Must have been some tall mace- work 
where you're standing, Beta! If we could know the complete story of this expedition, its probable failure to reach 
New York, its entrapment here, the siege and the inevitable 
tragedy of its end  starvation, sorties, repulses, hand-tohand flghting at the outer gates, in the nave, here at the 
crypt door, perhaps on the stairs and in the vaults below  
then defeat and slaughter and extinction  what a tremendous drama we could formulate ! " 

Beatrice nodded. Plain to see, the thought depressed 
her. 

" Death, everywhere  " she began, but Allan laughed. 

"Life, you mean!" he rallied. "Come, now, this does 
no good, poking in the rubbish of a distant tragedy. Real 
work awaits us. Come ! " 

He picked up the torch, and with his primitive but serviceable matches lighted it. The smoke rose through the 
silent air of the cathedral, up into a broad sunlit zone from 
a tall window in the transept, where it writhed blue and 
luminous. 

A single blow of Allan's ax shattered the last few shreds 
of oaken plank that still hung from the eroded hinges of 




 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

the door. In front of fbe exfribren a fljg of 
steps descended, winding darkly to the crjrpt bencatli. 

Allan went first, holduig the torch high to light (he wagr. 

''The records!'' he exdaimed. Sooa toon wt shall 
know the secrets of the pasti " 



.\ 



.  '  



. I 



.] 



CHAPTER VI 

TSAPPED ! 

SouE thirty steps the way descended, ending in a straight 
and very narrow passage. The air, though somewhat chill, 
was absolutely dry and perfectly respirable, thanks to the 
enormously massive foundation of solid concrete which 
formed practically one solid monolith six hundred feet 
long by two hundred and fifty broad  a monolith molded 
about the crypt and absolutely protecting it from every 
outside influence. 

" Not even the Great Pyramid of Ghizeh could afford a 
more perfect  hello, what's this?" 

Allan stopped short, staring downward at the floor. His 
voice reechoed strangely in the restricted space. 

" A skeleton, so help me! " 

True indeed. At one side of the passage, lying in a 
position that strongly suggested death in a crouching, despairing attitude  death by starvation rather than by violencea little clutter of human bones gleamed white under 
the torch-flare. 

" A skeleton  the first one of our vanished race we've 
ever found ! " exclaimed the man. " All the remains in New 
York, you remember, down in the subway or in any of the 
buildings, were invariably little piles of impalpable dust 
mixed with coins and bits of rusted metal. But this  it's 
absolutely intact ! " 

"The dry air and all  " suested Beatrice, 

Stem nodded. 

" Yes," he answered. " Intact, so far. But  " 

469 




470 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

He stirred the skull with his foot. Instantly it vanished 
into powder. 

' Just as I thought," said he. " No chance to give a decent burial to this or any other human remains we may 
come across here. The slightest disturbance totally disintegrates them. But with this it's diflFerent ! " 

He picked up a revolver, hardly rusted at all, that lay 
near at hand. 

" Cartridges ; look ! " cried Beatrice, pointing. 

" That's so, too  a score or more ! " 

Lying in an irregular oval that plainly told of a vanished 
cartridge-belt, a string of cartridges trailed on the concrete 
floor. 

" H-m-m-m 1 Just for an experiment, let's see ! " murmured the engineer. 

Already he had slipped in a charge. 

 Steady, Beatrice ! " he cautioned, and, pointing down 
the passage, pulled trigger. 

Flame stabbed the half-dark and the crashing detonation 
rang in their ears. 

' What do you think of thatf " cried Stem exultantly. 
" Talk about your miracles ! A thousand years and  " 

Beatrice grasped him by the arm and pointed downward. 
Astonished, he stared. The rest of the skeleton had vanished. In its place now only a few handfuls of dust lay 
on the floor. 

" Well, ril be" the man exclaimed. " Even that does 
the trick, eh? H-m! It would be a joke, now, wouldn't 
it, if the records should act the same way? Come on, 
Beta ; this is all very interesting, but it isn't getting us anywhere. We've got to be at work ! " 

He pocketed the new-found gun and cartridges and once 
more, torch on high, started down the passage, with the 
girl at his side. 

" See here, Allan ! " 

"Eh?" 

"On the wall here  a painted stripe?' 



TRAPPED! I 

He held the torch close and scrutinized the mark. 

" Lx)oks like it. Pretty well gone by now  just a flake 
here and a daub there, but I guess it once was a broad band 
of white. A guide? " 

They moved forward again. The strip ended in a blur 
that might once have been an inscription. Here, there, a 
letter faintly showed, but not one word could now be made 
out. 

" Too bad," he mused. " It must have been mighty important or they wouldn't have  " 

" Here's a door, Allan! " 

"So? That's right. Now this looks like business at 
last!" 

He examined the door by the unsteady flicker of the 
torch. It was of iron, still intact, and fastened by a long 
iron bar dropped into massive metal staples, 

" Beat it in with the ax? " she queried. 

" No. The concussion migiit reduce everjlhing inside 
to dust. Ah ! Here's a padlock and a chain ! " 

Carefully he studied the chain beneath bent brows. 

" Here, Beta, you hold the torch, so. That's right. Now 
then  " 

Already he had set the ax-blade between the padlock 
and the staple. A quick jerk  the lock flew open raspingly. Allan tried to lift the bar, but it resisted. 

A tap of the ax and it gave, swinging upward on a pivot. 
Then a minute later the door swung inward, yielding to 
his vigorous push. 

Together they entered the crypt of solid concrete, a 
chamber forty feet long by half as wide and vaulted 
overhead with arches, crowning perhaps twenty feet from 
the floor. 

" More skeletons, so help roe ! " 

Allan pointed at two more on the pavement at the leti 
of the entrance. 

" Why  how could that happen ? " queried Beta, puzzled. 
" The door was locked out3i(ie ! " 



/ 




472 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" That's so. Either there must be some other exit from 
this place or there were dissensions and fightings among 
the party itself. Or these men were wotmded and were 
locked in here for safe-keeping while the others made a 
sortie and never got back, or  I don't know ! Frankly, it's 
too much for me. If I were a story-writer I might figure 
it out, but I'm not. No matter, they're here, anyhow ; that's 
all. Here two of our own people died ten centuries ago, 
trying to preserve civilization and the world's history for 
future ages, if there were to be any such. Two martyrs. 
I salute them ! " 

In silence and awed sympathy they inspected the mournful relics of humanity a minute, but took good care not to 
touch them. 

" And now the records ! " 

Even as Stern spoke he saw again a dimly painted line, 
this time upon the floor, all but invisible beneath the dust 
of centuries that had come from God knows where. 

" Come, let's follow the line ! " cried he. 

It led them straight through the middle of the crypt and 
to a sort of tunnel-like vault at the far end. This they 
entered quickly and almost at once knew they had reached 
the goal of their long quest. 

In front of them, about seven feet from the floor, a rough 
white star had been smeared. Directly below it a kind of 
alcove or recess appeared, lined with shelves of concrete. 
What its original purpose may have been it would be hard 
to say; perhaps it may have been intended as a storageplace for the cathedral archives. 

But now the explorers saw it was partly filled with pile on 
pile of curiously crinkled parchment not protected in any 
way from the air, not covered or boxed in. To the right, 
however, stood a massive chest, seemingly of sheet-lead. 

" Some sense to the lead," growled Stem ; " but why they 
left their records open to the air. blest if I can see! " 

He raised the torch and flared the light along the shelves, 
and then he understood. For here, there, copper nails 



TRAPPED! 473 

glinted dully, lying in dust that once upon a time had been 
wood. 

" I'm wrong, Beta ; I apologize to them," Stern exclaimed. 
" These were all securely boxed once, but the boxes have 
gone to pieces long since. Dry-rot, you know. Well, let's 
see what condition the parchments arc in ! " 

She held the torch while he tried to raise one, but it 
broke at the slightest touch. Again he assayed, and a third 
time. Same result. 

"Great Scott!" he ejaculated, nonplused. "See what 
we're up against, will you? We've found 'em and they're 
ours, but  " 

They stood considering a minute. All at once a dull 
metallic clang echoed heavily through the crypl. Despite 
herself, the girl shuddered. The eery depths, the gloom, 
the skeletons had all conspired to shake her nerves. 

"What's that?" she whispered, gripping Allan by the 
arm. 

" That ? Oh  nothing ! Now how the deuce are we going to get at these  " 

" It Tc'uj something, Allan ! But what ? " 

He grew suddenly silent. 

" By Jove  it sounded like  the door  " 

"The door? Oh, Allan, quick I" 

A sudden, irresistible fear fingered at the strings of the 
man's heart. At the back of his neck he felt ihe hair begin 
to lift. Then he smiled by very strength of will. 

" Don't be absurd, Beatrice," he managed to say. " It 
couldn't be, of course. There's no one here. It  " 

But already she was out of the alcove. With the torch 
held high in air, she stood there peering with wide eyes 
down the long blackness of the crypt, striving to pierce the 
dark. 

Then suddenly he heard her cry of terror. 

" The door. Allan I The door I Is shut! " 




CHAPTER VII 



THE LEADEN CHEST 



Not at any time since the girl and he had wakened in the 
tower, more than a year ago, had Allan felt so compelling a 
fear as overswept him then. The siege of the Horde at 
Madison Forest, the plunge down the cataract, the fall into 
the Abyss and the battle with the Lanskaarn had all taxed 
his courage to the utmost, but he had met these perils with 
more calm than he now faced the blank menace of that 
metal door. 

For now no sky overhung him, no human agency opposed 
him, no counterplay of stress and strife thrilled his blood. 

No ; the girl and he now were far underground in a crjrpt, 
a tomb, walled round with incalculable tons of concrete, 
barred from the upper world, alone  and for the first time 
in his life the man knew something of the anguish of unreasoning fear. 

Yet he was not bereft of powers of action. Only an instant he stood there motionless and staring; then with a 
cry, wordless and harsh, he ran toward the barrier. 

Beneath his spurning feet the friable skeletons crumbled 
and vanished; he dashed himself against the door with 
a curse that was half a prayer; he strove with it  and 
staggered back, livid and shaken, for it held ! 

Now Beatrice had reached it, too. In her hand the torch 
trembled and shook. She tried to speak, but could not. And 
as he faced her, there in the tomblike vault, their eyes met 
silently. 

A deathly stillness fell, with but their heart-beats and the 
sputtering of the torch to deepen it. 

474 



THE LEADEN CHEST 475 

" Oh I " she gasped, stretching out a hand. " Yoi-  we  
can't  " 

He licked his lips and tried to smile, but failed. 

"Don't  don't be afraid, little girl!" he stammered. 
" This can't hold us, possibly. The chain  I broke it!" 

" Yes. but the bar, Allan  the bar! How did you leave 
the bar? " 

"Raised!" 

The one word seemed to seal their doom. A shudder 
passed through Beatrice. 

" So then," she choked, " some air-current swung the 
door shut  and the bar  fell  " 

A sudden rage possessed the engineer. 

" Dama that infernal staple 1 " he gritted, and as he spoke 
the ax swung into air. 

" Crash ! " 

On the metal plates it boomed and echoed thunderously. 
A ringing clangor vibrated the crypt. 

" Crash!" 

Did the door start? No; but in the long-eroded plates a 
jagged dent took form. 

Again the ax swung high. Cold though the vault was, 
sweat globuled his forehead, where the veins had swelled 
to twisting knots. 

' Crash!" 

With a wild vcrberation, a scream of sundered metal and 
a clatter of flying fragments, the staple gave way. A crack 
showed round the edge of the iron barrier. 

Stern flung his shoulder against the door. Creaking, it 
swung. He staggered through. One hand groped out to 
steady htm, against the wall. From the other the ax 
dropped crashing to the floor. 

Only a second he stood thus, swaying; then he turned 
and gathered Beta in his arms. And on his breast she hid 
her face, from which the roses all had faded quite. 

He felt her fighting back the tears, and raised her head 
and kissed her. 



 




476 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" There, there ! ' he soothed. " It wasn't anything, after 
all, you see. But  if we hadn't brought the ax with us  " 

" Oh, Allan, let's go now I This crypt I can't" 

" We will go very soon. But there's no danger now, 
darling. We're not children, you know. We've still got 
work to do. We'll go soon ; but first, those records i " 

 Oh, how can you, after  after what might have been? " 

He found the strength to smile. 

" I know," he answered, " but it didn't happen, after all. 
A miss is worth a million miles, dear. That's what life 
seems to mean to us, and has meant ever since we woke in 
the tower, peril and risk, labor and toil  and victory! 
Come, come, let's get to work again, for there's so endlessly 
much to do." 

Calmer grown, the girl found new courage in his eyes 
and in his strong embrace. 

" You're right, Allan. I was a little fool to" 

He stopped her self-reproach with kisses, then picked 
up the torch from the floor where it had fallen from her 
nerveless hand. 

"If you prefer," he offered. " I'll take you back into 
the sunlight, and you can sit under the trees and watch 
the river, while I  " 

" Where you are, there am I ! Come on, Allan ; let's 
get it over with. Oh, what a coward you must think me! " 

" I think you're a woman, and the bravest that ever 
lived ! " he exclaimed vehemently.  Who but you could 
ever have gone through with me all that has happened? 
Who could be my mate and face the future as you're doing? 
Oh, if you only understood my estimate of you! 

" But now let's get at those records again. Time's passing, and there must be still no end of things to do! " 

He recovered his ax, and with another blow demolished 
the last fragment of the staple, so that by no possibility could 
the door catch again. 

Then for the second time they penetrated the crjrpt and 
the tunnel and once more reached the alcove of the records. 



THE LEADEN CHEST 477 

" Beatrice 1 " 

" What is it, Allan?" 

" L,ook ! Gone  all gone I " 

" Gonef Why, what do you mean? They're  " 

"Gone, I tell you! My God! Just a mass o rubbish, 
powder, dust  " 

" But  but how  " 

"The concussion of the ax! That must have done it! 
The violent sound-waves  the air in oommolion ! " 

"But, Allan, it can't be! Surely there must be something left?" 

" You see ? " 

He pointed at the shelves. She stood and peered, with 
htm, at the sad havoc wrought there. Then she stretched 
out a tentative finger and stirred a little of tlie detritus. 

" Catastrophe ! " she cried. 

" Yes and no. At any rate, it may have been inevitable." 

" Inevitable? " 

He nodded. 

' Even if this hadn't happened, Beatrice, I'm afraid we 
never could have moved any of these parchments, or read 
them, or handled them in any way. Perhaps if we'd had 
all kinds of proper appliances, glass plates, transparent 
adhesives, and so on, and a year or two at our disposal, we 
might have made something out of them, but even so, it's 
doubtful. 

" Of course, in detective stories, Hawkshaw can take the 
ashes right out of the grate and piece them tcether and 
pour chemicals on them and decipher the mystery of the 
lost rubies, and all that. But this isn't a story, you see; and 
what's more, Hawkshaw doesn't have to work with ashes 
nearly a ihousand years old. Ten centuries of dry-rot 
that's some problem! " 

She stood agliast. hardly able to believe her eyes. 

" But  but," she finally articulated, " there's the other 
cache out there in Medicine Bow Range. The cave, you 
koow. And we have the bearings. And some time, when 



/ 




478 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

we've got all the leisure in the world and all the necessary 
appliances  " 

" Yes, perhaps. Although, of course, you realize the 
earth is seventeen degrees out of its normal plane, and every 
reckoning's shifted. Still, it's a possibility. But for the 
present there's strictly nothing doing, after all." 

 How about that leaden chest ? " 

She wheeled about and pointed at the other side of the 
alcove, where stood the metal box, sullen, defiant, secure. 

'By Jove, that's so, too! Why, I'd all but forgotten 
that ! You're a brick, Beta ! The box, by all means. Perhaps the most important things of all are still in safety 
there. Who knows ? " 

" Open it, Allan, and let's see ! " 

Her recent terror almost forgotten in this new excitement, the girl had begun to get back some of her splendid 
color. And now, as she stood gazing at the metal chest 
which still, perhaps, held the most vital of the records, she 
felt again a thrill of excitement at thought of all its possibilities. 

The man, too, gazed at it with keen emotion. 

' We've got to be careful this time, Beatrice!" said he. 
" No more mistakes. If we lose the contents of this chest, 
Heaven only knows when we may be able to get another 
glimpse into the past. Frankly, the job of opening it, without ruining the contents, looks pretty stiff. Still, with care 
it may be done. Let's see, now, what are we up against 
here?" 

He took the torch from her and minutely examined the 
leaden casket. 

It stood on the concrete floor, massive and solid, about 
tliree and a half feet high by five long and four wide. So 
far as he could see, there were neither locks nor hinges. 
The cover seemed to have been hermetically sealed on. 
Still visible were the marks of the soldering-iron, in a ragged 
line, about three inches from the top. 

"The only way to get in here is to cut it open," said 



THE LEADEN CHEST 479 

Allan at last. " If we had any means of melting the solder, 
that would be better, of course, but there's no way to heat 
a tool in this crypt. I take it the men who did this work 
had a plumber's gasoline torch, or something of that sort. 
We have practically nothing. As for building a fire in here 
and heating one of the aeroplane tools, that's out of the 
question. It would stifle us both. No, we must cut. That's 
the best we can do." 

He drew his hunting-knife from its sheath and, giving 
the torch back to Beatrice, knelt by the chesl. Close under 
the line of soldering he dug the blade into the soft metal, 
and, boring with it, soon made a puncture through the 
leaden sheet. 

" Only a quarter of an inch thick," he announced, with 
satisfaction. " This oughtn't to be such a bad job! " 

Already he was at work, with infinite care not to shock 
or jar the precious contents within. In his powerful hands 
the knife laid back the metal in a jagged line. A quarter 
of an hour sufficed to cut across the entire front. 

He rested a httle while. 

" Seems to be another chest inside, of wood," he told the 
girl. " Not decayed, either. I shouldn't wonder if the 
lead had preserved things absolutely intact. In that case 
this find is sure to be a rich one." 

Again he set to work. In an hour from the time he had 
begun, the whole top of the lead box  save only that portion 
against the wall  had been cut off, 

"Do you dare to move it out, Allan?" queried the girl 
anxiously. 

" Better not. I think we can raise the cover as it is." 

He slit up the front corners, and then with comparative 
ease bent the entire top upward. To the explorer's eyes 
stood revealed a chest of cedar, its cover held with copper 
screws. 

" Now for it ! " said the man. " We ought to have one 
of the screw-drivers from the Pauillac. but that would take 
too much time. I guess the knife will do." 



r 



4fio 



DARKNESS AND DAWN 



With the Uade he attacked the Krews, one by one, and 
by dint of laborious patience in about an hour had removed 
all twenty of them. 

A minute later he had pried up. the cover, had quite removed it, and bad set it on the flbor. 

Within, at one tide, they law a formless somethir 
swathed in oiled canvas. The other haU of the space was 
occupied by eighty or a hundred vertical compartments, in 
each of which stood something carefully enveloped in the 
same material. 

" Well, for all the world if it doesn't look like a set of 
bi phonograph records I " exclaimed the man. He drew one 
of the objects out and very carefully unwrapped it. 

"Just what they are  records I On steel. The new 
Chalmers-Enemardc proMss  new, that is, in 1917. So, 
then, that's a phonograph, eh P " 

He pointed at the oiled canvas. 

" Open it, quick, AllanI" Beabice exclaimed. " If it it 
a phcHicgraph, why, aw can htar the very voices of the past, 
the dead, a full thousand years ago! '" 

With trembling fingers Stem slit the canvas wrappings. 

"What a treasure I What a findl" he exulted. " Look, 
Beta  see what fortune has pot into our hand 

Even as he q>oke he was Itf ig the great phonograph 
from the space where, absolutely uninjured and intact, it 
had reposed for ten centuries. A rilver plate caught his eyct 
He paused to-read : 

METROPOLITAN OPERA HOUSE. 
New Yoric City. 

This Phonograph and these Records were immured in the 
vault of this building September aS, 1918, by the Philavox 
Society, to be opened in the year aooo. 

Nan Pertat Memoria Mutkae Ni 



THE LEADEN CHEST 481 

" Let not the memory of our music perish ! " he translated. " Why, I remember well when these records were 
made and deposited in the Metropolitan! A similar thing 
was done in Paris, you remember, and in Berlin. But how 
does this machine come here?" 

" Probably the expedition reached New York, after all, 
and decided to transfer this treasure to a safer place where 
it might be absolutely safe and dry," she suggested. " It's 
here, anyhow ; that's the main thing, and we've found it. 
What fortune I " 

" It's lucky, all right enough," the man assented, setting 
the magnificent machine down on the floor of the crypt. 
" So far as I can see, the mechanism is absolutely all right 
in every way. They've even put in a box of the special 
fiber needles for use on the steel plates, Beta. Everything's 
provided for. 

" Do you know, the expedition must have been a much 
larger one than we thought? It was no child's play to 
invade the ruins of New York, rescue all this, and transport it here, probably with savages dogging their heels every 
step. Those certainly were determined, vigorous men, and 
a goodly number at that. And the fight they must have put 
up in the cathedral, defending their cache against the enemy, 
and dying for it, must been terrifically dramatic! 

" But all that's done and forgotten now, and we can only 
guess a fait of it here and there. The tangible fact is this 
machine and these records, Beatrice, They're real, and 
we've got them. And the quicker we see what they have to 
tell us the better, eh? " 
 She clapped her hands with enthusiasm. 

" Put on a record, Allan, quick ! Let's hear the voices 
of the past once more  human voices  the voices of the 
age that was ! " she cried, excited as a child. 



-w 



I 




CHAPTER Vra 

" TILL DEATH US DO PART  

" All right, my darling," he made answer. " But not here 
This is no place for melody, down in this dark and gloomy 
crypt, surrounded by the relics of the dead. We've been 
buried alive down here altogether too long as it is. Brrr! 
The chill's beginning to get into my very bcxiesl Don't 
you feel it. Beta?" 

" I do, now I stop to think of it. Well, let's go up then. 
We'll have our music where it belongs, in the cathedral, 
with sunshine and air and birds to keep it company I " 

Half an hour later they had transported the magnificent 
phonograph and the steel records out of the crypt and np 
the spiral stairway, into the vast, majestic 8weq> of the 
transept. 

They placed their find on the broad concrete 8tq>s that 
in the old days had led up to the altar, and while Allan 
minutely examined the mechanism to make sure that all : 
was right, the girl, sitting on the top step, locked over the 
records. 

'' Why, Allan, here are instrumental as well as vocal masterpieces," she announced with joy. "Just listen  here's 
Rossini's ' Barbier de Seville,' and Gris ' Anitra's Dance  
from the  Peer Gynt Suite,' and here's that most entrancing 
' Barcarolle ' from the  Contes d'Hoffman '  you remember 
it?" 

She began to hum the air, then, as the harmony flowed 

482 



"TILL DEATH US DO PART" 483 

through her soul, sang a few lines, her voice like gold and 
honey : 

Belle nuit, o nuit d'amour, souris d nos ivresses! 
Nttit plus douce que le jour, belle nuit d'amour! 
Le temps fuit et sans retour emporte nos tendresses; 
Loin de eel keureux s6jour le temps fuit sans retour.' 

Zephyrs embrasis, versez-Kous vos caresses! 

Ah! Donnez-nous vos baiters! 

The echoes of Offenbach's wondrous air, a crystal stream 
of harmony, and of the passion-pulsing words, died through 
the vaulted heights. A moment Allan sat silent, gazing at 
the girl, and then he smiled. 

" It lives in you again, the past ! " he cried. " In you 
the world shall be made new once morel Beatrice, when 
I last heard that ' Barcarolle ' it was sung by Farrar and 
Scotti at the Metropolitan, in the winter of 1913- And now 
 you waken the whole scene in me again ! 

" I seem to behold the vast, clear-lighted space anew, the 
tiers of gilded galleries and boxes, the thousands of men 
and women hanging eagerly on every silver note  I see the 
marvelous orchestra, many, yet one ; the Venetian scene, the 
moonlight on the Grand Canal, the gondolas, the merrymakers I hear Giuiictta and Nicklausse blending those 
perfect tones ! My heart leaps at the memory, beloved, and 
I bless you for once more awakening it!" 

"With my poor voice?" she smiled. "Play it, play 
the record, Allan, and let us hear it as it should be sung ! " 

He shook his head. 

" No! " he declared. " Not after you have sung it. Your 
voice to me is infinitely sweeter than any that the world of 
other days ever so much as dreamed of!" 

He bent above her, caressed her hair and kissed her; and 
for a little while they both forgot their music. But soon 
the girl recalled him to the work in hand. 

"Come, Allan, there's so much to dot" 



y 




484 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" I know. Well now  let's see, what next ? " 

He paused, a new thought in his eyes. 

"Beta I" 

"Well?" 

"You don't find Mendelssohn's 'Wedding March/ do 
you ? Look, dearest, see if you can find it Perhaps it may 
be there. If so" 

She eyed him, her gaze widening. 

"You mean?" 

He nodded. 

" Just so ! Perhaps, after all, you and I can 

"Oh, come and help me look for it, Allan!'' she cried 
enthusiastic as a child in the joy of his new inspiratioiL 
"If we only could find it, woulchi't that be glorious?" 

Eagerly they searched together. 

"  Ich GroUe Nicht, by Schumann, no," Stem commented, as one by one they examined the records. "  Ave 
Maria,' Arcadelt-Liszt  no, though it's magnificent. That's 
the one you sing best of all. Beta. How often you've sung 
it to me ! Remember, at the bungalow, how I used to lay 
my head in your lap while you played with my Samsonesque 
locks and sang me to sleep ? Let's see  Brahms's  Wiegcnlied.' Cradle-song, eh? A little premature; that's coming 
later. Eh ? Found it, by Jove ! Here we are, the March 
itself, so help me! Shall I play it now?" 

" Not yet, Allan. Here, see what I've found ! " 

She handed him a record as they sat there together in a 
broad ribbon of mid-morning sunlight that flooded down 
through one of the clearstory windows. 

"  The Form of the Solemnization of Matrimony by 
Bishop Gibson,' " he read. And silence fell, and for a !<Mig 
minute their eyes met 

" Beatrice ! " 

" I know ; I unaerstand ! So, after all, these words  " 

" Shall be spoken, O my love! Out of the dead past a 
voice shall speak to us and we shall heart Beatrice, the 
words your mother heard, my mother heard, we shall heaTi 
too. Come, Beatrice, for now the time is at hand ! " 



"TILL DEATH US DO PART" 48s 

She fell a trembling, and for a moment could not speak. 
Her eyes grew veiled in tears, but through them he saw 
a bright smile break, like sunlight after summer showers. 

She stood up and held out her hand to him. 

"My Allan!" 

In his arms he caught her. 

"At last!" he whispered. "Oh, at last I" 

When the majesty and beauty of the immortal marriage 
hymn climbed the high vaults of the cathedral, waking the 
echoes of the vacant spaces, and when it rolled, pealing 
triumphantly, she leaned her head upon his breast and, 
trembling, clung to him. 

With his arm he clasped her; he leaned above her, shrouding her in his love as in an everlasting benison. And through 
their souls thrilled wonder, awe and passion, and life held 
another meaning and another mystery. 

The words of solemn sacredness hallowed for centuries 
beyond the memory of man, rose powerful, heart- thrilling, 
deep with symbolism, strong with vibrant might  and, hand 
in hand, the woman and the man bowed their heads, listening: 

" Dearly beloved, we are gathered here to Join together 
this man and this woman in holy matrimony  rez'erenfly, 
discreetly, adz-iscdly, soberly. Into this holy estate these 
t'ii-o persons present nozv come to be joined." 

His hand tightened upon her hand, for he felt her trembling. But bravely she smiled up at him and upon her hair 
the golden sunlight made an aureole. 

The voice rose in its soul-shaking question  slow and 
powerful : 

" Wilt thou haz'e this woman to thy wedded wife, to live 
together in the holy estate of matrimonyf Wilt thou love 
her, comfort her, honor, and keep her in sickness and in 



i 




486 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

health, and keep thee only unto her, so long as ye both shall 

liver " 

Allan's " / will! " was as a hymn of joy upon the morning air. 



tt 



Wilt thou have this man to thy wedded husband, to live 
together in the holy estate of matrimony f Wilt thou serve 
him, love, honor, and keep him in sickness and in heglth, and 
keep thee only unto him, so long as ye both shaU Itvet" 

She answered proudly, bravely : 

" I will ! " 

Then the man chorused the voice and said: 

' I, Allan, take thee, Beatrice, to my wedded wife, to 
have and to hold from this day forward for better, for 
worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in health to 
love and to cherish, till death us do part, and thereto I plight 
thee my troth," 

Her answer came, still led by the commanding voice, like 
an antiphony of love: 

" I, Beatrice, take thee, Allan, to my wedded husband, to 
have and to hold from this day forward for better, for 
worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in health to 
love and to cherish, till death us do part, and thereto I give 

thee my troth!'' 

Already Allan had drawn from his little finger the plain 
gold ring he had worn there so many centuries. Upon her 
finger he placed the ring and kissed it, and, following the 
voice, he said: 



it 



With this ring I thee zved, and with all my worldly 



"TILL DEATH US DO PART" 487 

goods I thee endow. In the name of the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen." 

Forest, river, sky and golden sunlight greeted them as 
they stood on the broad porch of the cathedral, and the 
clear song of many birds, unafraid in the virgin wilderness, 
made music to their ears such as must have greeted the 
primal day. 

Suddenly Allan caught and crushed her in his arms. 

"My wife!" he whispered. 

The satin of her skin from breast to brow surged into 
sudden flame. Her eyes closed and bety/een her eager lips 
the breath came fast. 

' Oh, AWanhushand .' I feel  I hear  " 

" The voice of the unborn, crying to us from out the 
dark, ' father, mother, give us life!'" -  r %. 



r 

w-.


 



i 




CHAPTER IX 

AT SETTLEMENT CLIFFS 

Ten days later the two lovers  now man and wife  were 
back again at the eastern lip of the Abyss. With them on 
the biplane they had brought the phonograph and records, 
all securely wrapped in oiled canvas, the same which had 
enveloped the precious objects in the leaden chest. 

They made a camp, which was to serve them for a while 
as headquarters in their tremendous undertaking of bringing the Merucaans to the surface, and here carefully stored 
their treasure in a deep cleft of rock, secure from rain and 
weather. 

They had not revisited the bungalow on the return trip. 
The sight of their little home and garden, now totally 
devastated, they knew would only sadden them unnecessarily. 

 Let it pass, dearest, as a happy memory that was and 
is no more," Stern cheered the girl as he held her in his 
arms the first night of their stay in the new camp, and 
as together they watched the purple haze of sunset beyond 
the chasm. " Some day, perhaps, we may go back and once 
more restore Hope Villa and live there again, but for the 
present many other and far more weighty matters press. 
It will be wisest for a while to leave the East alone. Too 
many of the Horde are still left there. Here, west of the 
Ohio River Valley, they don't seem to have penetrated  
and what's more, they never shall! Just now we must 
ignore them  though the day of reckoning will surely come I 
WeVe got our hands full for a while with the gigantic task 

488 



AT SETTLEMENT CLIFFS 489 

ahead of us. It's the biggest and the hardest thai one man 
and one woman ever tackled since the beginning of timcl " 

She drew his head down and kissed him, and for a. little 
while they kept the silence of perfect comradeship. But 
at last she questioned : 

" You've got it all worked out at last, Allan ? You know 
just the steps to take? One false move  " 

" There shall be no false moves. Reason, deliberation, 
care will solve this problem like all the others. Given some 
fifteen hundred people, at a depth of five hundred miles, 
and given an aeroplane and plenty of time  " 

" Yes. of course, they can be brought to the surface. 
But after that, what? The dangers are tremendous! The 
patriarch died at the first touch of sunlight. We can't afford 
to take chances with the rest I " 

" I've planned on all that. Our first move must be to 
locate a rocky ledge, a cave, or something of the sort, where 
the transplanting process can be carried out. There mustn't 
be any exposure to the actual daylight for a long time after 
they're on the surface. The details of food and water have 
all got to be arranged, too. It means work, work, work/ 
God, what work! But  it's our task. Beta, all our own. 
And I glory in it. I thank Heaven for it  a man's-size 
labor! And if we're strong and brave enough, patient and 
wise enough, we're bound to win." 

"Win? Of course we'll win I" she answered, her failh 
in him touching the sublime. " We must ! The life of the 
whole world's at stake!" 

Night came, and redder glowed the firelight in the gloom. 
They spoke of life, of love, of destiny; and over ihem 
seemed to brood the mystery of all that was to be. 

The very purpose of the universe enwrapped itself about 
their passion, and the untroubled stars kept vigils till the 
dawn. 

Daylight called them to begin the epic campaign they 
had mapped out  the rescue of a race. 

After a visit to the patriarch's grave, which they decked 



I 




490 DARKNESS AND DAWN -' 

anew with blossoms and fresh leaves, they prepared for the 
journey in search of a suitable temporary home for the Folk. 

Nine o'clock found them once more on the wing. Stem 
laid a southerly course along the edge of the Abyss. He 
and Beatrice had definitely decided that the new home of 
humanity was not to be the distant regions of the East, 
involving so long and perilous a journey, but rather some 
location in the vast, warm, central plain of what had once 
been the United States. 

They judged they were now somewhere in the one-time 
State of Indiana, not far from Indianapolis. So much 
warmer had the climate grown that for some months to 
come at least the Folk could without doubt accustom themselves to the change from the hot and muggy atmosphere 
of the Abyss to the semitropic heat. 

The main object now was to discover suitable caves near 
a good water supply, where by night the Folk could prosecute their accustomed fisheries. Agriculture and the care 
of domestic animals by daylight would have to be postponed for some time, possibly for a year or more. Above 
all, the health of the prospective colonists must be safeguarded. 

It was not until nearly nightfall of the next day, and 
after stops had been made at the ruins of two considerable 
hut unidentified towns  for fuel, as well as to fit up an 
electric search-light and hooded lamps to illuminate the 
instruments in the Abyss  that the explorers found what 
tliey were seeking. 

About half past five that afternoon they sighted a very 
considerable river, flowing westward down a rugged and 
irregular valley, in the direction of the chasm. 

" This can't be the Ohio," judged Stem. " We must 
have long since passed its bed, now probably dried up. I 
don't remember any such hilly region as this in the old 
days along the Mississippi Valley. All these formations 
must be the result of the cataclysm. Well, no matter, just 
so we find what we're after." 



AT SETTLEMENT CLIFFS 491 

"Where are we now?" she asked, peering downward 
anxiously. " Over what State  can you tell ? " 

" Probably Tennessee or northern Alabama. See the 
change in vegetation ? No conifers here, but many palms 
and fern-trees, and new, strange growths. Fertile isn't the 
name for it! Once we clear some land here, crops will 
grow themselves! I don't thinlc we'll do better than this. 
Beta. Shall we land and see?" 

A quarter-hour later the Pauillac had safely deposited 
them on a high, rocliy plateau about half a mile back from 
the edge of the river canon. Stern, in his eagerness, was 
all for cave-hunting that very evening, but the girl restrained him. 

" Not so impatient, dear ! " she cautioned. " ' Too fast 
arrives as tardy as too slow ! ' To-morrow's time enough." 

"Ruling me with quotations from Shakespeare, eh?" 
he laughed, with a kiss, "AH right, have your way  Mrs. 
Stern!" 

She laughed, too, at this, the first time she had heard her 
new name. .So they made camp and postponed further 
labors till daylight again. 

Morning found than early astir and at work. Together 
they traversed the tropic-seeming woods, atlame with brilliant flowers, dank with ferns and laced with twining lianas. 

In the treetops  strange trees, fruit laden  parraleets 
and flashing green and crimson birds of paradise disturbed 
the little monkeyfolk that chattered at the intruders. Once 
a coral-red snake whipped away, hissing, but not quick 
enough lo dodge a ball from Stern's revolver. 

Stern viewed the ugly, triangular head with apprehension. 
Weil he knew that venom dwelt there, but he said nothing. 
The one and only chance of successfully transplanting the 
Folk must be to regions warm as these. All dangers must 
be braved a time till they could grow acclimated to the upper 
air. After that  but the vastness of the future deterred 
even speculation. Perils were inevitable. The more there 
were to overcome the greater the victory. 



/ 




492 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" On to the cliffs ! ' said he, clasping the girl's hand in 
his own and making a path for her. 

Thus presently they reached the edge of the caiion. 

 Magnificent ! ' cried Beatrice as they came out on the 
overhang of the rock wall. "With these fruitful woods 
behind, that river in front, and these natural fortifications 
for our home, what more could we want?" 

" Nothing except caves," Stem answered. " Let's call 
this New Hope River, eh ? And the cliffs ? " 

" Settlement Cliffs ! " she exclaimed. 

" Done ! Well, now let's see." 

For the better part of the morning they explored the face 
of the palisade. Its height, they estimated, ranged from 
two to three hundred feet, shelving down in rough terraces 
to the rocky debris through and beyond which foamed the 
strong current of New Hope River, a stream averaging 
about two hundred yards in width. 

Up-current a broader pool gave promise of excdlent 
fishing. It overflowed into violent rapids, with swift, white 
waters noisily cascading. 

" There, incidentally," Stem remarked, with the practical 
perception of the engineer, " there's power enough, when 
properly harnessed, to light a city and to turn machinery 
ad libitum. I don't see how we could better this site, do 
you ? " 

" Not if you think there are good chances for cavedwellings," she made answer. 

" From what we've seen already, it looks promising. Of 
course, there'll be a deal of work to do; but there are excellent possibilities here. First rate." 

Fortune seemed bent on favoring them. The limestone 
cliff, fantastically eroded, offered a score of shelters, some 
shallow and needing to be walled up in front, others deep 
and tortuous. All was in utter confusion. 

Stem saw that the terraces would have to be blasted and 
leveled, roads and stairs built along the face of the rock 
and down to the river, stalactites and stalagmites cut away. 



AT SETTLEMENT CLIFFS 493 

chambers fashioned, and a vast deal of labor done; but the 
rough framework of a chif colony undeniably existed 
here. He doubted whether it would be possible to find a 
more favorable site without long and tedious travels. 

" I guess we'll take the apartments and sign the lease," 
he decided toward noon, after they had clanibered. pried, 
explored with improvised torches, and penetrated far into 
some of the grottoes. " The main thing to consider is that 
we can find darkness and humidity for the Tolk by day. 
They mustn't be let out at first except in the night. It 
may be weeks or months before they can stand the direct 
sunlight. But that, too, will come. Patience, girl  patience 
and time  and all will yet be done." 

Yet, even as he spoke, a strange anxiety, a prescience of 
tremendous dilhcuhics, brooded in his soul. These were 
not cattle that he had to deal with, but men. 

Could he and Beatrice, rulers of the Folk though they 
now were, could they  with their paltry knowledge of the 
people's language, superstitions, prejudices and inner life  
really bring about this great migration? 

Could they ravish a nation from its accustomed home, 
transplant it bodily, force new conditions on it, train, teach, 
civilize it? All this without rebellion, anarchy and failure? 

" God ! " thought the engineer. " The labors of Hercules 
were child's play beside this problem I " 

His heart quaked at the thought of all that lay ahead; 
yet through everything, deep in the basic strata of his 
being, he knew that all should be and must be as he planned. 

Barring dealh only, the seemingly impossible should come 
to pass. 

" I swear it! " he murmured to himself. " For Aersake, 
for theirs, and for the world's, I swear it shall be I " 

At high noon they emerged once more from the caverns, 
climbed the steep cliff face, and again stood on the hcighls
Facing northward, their gaze swept the lower river-bank 
opposite, and reached away, away, over the rolling hills 
and plains that lay, a virgin forest, to the dim horuon. 



i" 




494 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

brooding, mysterious, quivering with fertility and wild, 
strange life. 

" Some time," he prophesied, sweepingliis arm out toward 
the wilderness  " some time all that-d far beyond  
shall be dotted with clearings and rich farms, with cottages, 
schools, towns, cities. Broad highways shall traverse it 
The hum of motors, of machinery, of industry of life 
itself  shall one day displace the cry of beast and bird. 

" Some time the English tongue shall reign here again  
here and beyond. Here strong men shall toil and build and 
reap and rest. Here love shall reign and women be called 
' mother.' Here children shall play and learn and grow to 
manhood and to womanhood, secure and free. 

" Some time all good things shall here come to realization. Oppression and slavery, alone, shall be undreamed 
of. These, and poverty and pain, shall never enter into 
the new world that is to be. 

" Some time, here,  all shall be better than well.' 50111 
timer' 

He circled her with his arm, and for a while they stood 
surveying this cradle of the new race. Much mov, Beatrice drew very close to him. They made no speech. 

For the dreams they two were dreaming, as the golden 
sun irradiated all that vast, magnificent wilderness, passed 
any power of words. 

Only she whispered " Some time! " too, and Allan knew 
she shared with him the glory of his vast, tremendous 
vision I 



SEPAKATION 

They spent the remainder of that day and all the next in 
hard work, making practical preparations for the arrival 
of the first settlers. Allan assured himself the waters of 
New Hope River were soft and pure and that an ample 
supply of fish dwelt in the pool as well as in the rapids  
trout, salmon and pike of new varieties and great size, as 
welt as other species. 

Beatrice and he, working together, put the largest and 
darkest of the caves into habitable order. They also prepared, for their own use, a sunny grotto, which they thought 
could with reasonable labor be made into a comfortable 
temporary home. 

" Though it isn't our own cozy bungalow, and never can 
be," she remarked rather mournfully, surveying the fireplace of roughly piled stones Allan had built. " Oh, dear, 
If we only couid have had that to live in while  " 

He stopped her yearning with a kiss. 

"There, there, little girl," he cheered her, "don't be 
impatient. All in good time we'll have another, garden 
and sun-dial and everything. All in good time. The more 
we have to overcome, the more we'll appreciate results, eh? 
The only really serious matter to consider now is you!" 

"Me, Allan? Why, what do you mean? What about 
me?" 

He sat down on the rough-hewn bench of 1( that he 
had fashioned and drew her to him. 

" Listen, Beta. This is very serious." 




496 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

"What, Allan? Has anything happened?" 

" No, and nothing must, either. That's what's troubling 
me now. Our separation, I mean." 

" Our why, what" 

"Don't you see? Can't you understand? We've got 
to be apart a while. I must go alone  ' 

" Oh, no, no, Allan ! You mustn't ; I can't let you ! " 

" You've got to let me, darling ! The machine will only 
carry, at most, three persons and a little freight. Now if 
you take the trip back into the Abyss I can only bring one, 
just one of the Folk back with me. And at that rate you 
can see for yourself how long it will take to make even a 
beginning at colonization. I figure three or four days for 
the round trip, at the inside. If you go we'll be all summer 
and more getting even twenty-five or thirty colonists here. 
Whereas, if you can manage to let me do this work alone, 
we'll have fifty in the caves by October. So you see   

" You don't want to go and leave me, Allan? " 

" God forbid ! Shall I abandon the whole attempt and 
settle down with you here, all alone, and  " 

" No, no. no ! Not that, Allan ! " 

" I knew you'd say so. After all, the future of the race 
means more than our own welfare or comfort or anything. 
Even our safety has got to be risked for it. So you see  " 

She thought a moment, clinging to him, somewhat pale 
and shaken, but with an indefinable courage in her eyes. 
Then asked she: 

 Wouldn't it be possible in some way  for you can do 
anything, Allan  wouldn't it be possible for you to build 
another machine ? Surely in the ruins of some city not too 
far away, in Nashville, Cincinnati, or Detroit, you could 
find materials! Couldn't you make another aeroplane and 
leach me how to fly, so I could help you? I'd learn, Allan! 
I'd dare, and be brave  awfully brave, for your sake, and 
theirs, and  " 

He gravely shook his head in negation. 

" I know you would, dearest, but you mustn't. Half my 



SEPARATION 497 

real reason for not wanting you to go with me is just this 
danger of flying. You'll be safer here. With plenty of 
supplies and your pisto! you'll be all right. I know it seems 
heartless to talk of leaving you, even for three days, but, 
after all, it's far the wisest way. We'll build a barricade 
and make a regular fort for you and stock it with supplies. 
Then you can wait for me and the first two settlers. And 
after that you'll have company. Why, you'll have subjects 
 for, until they're educated, we've simply got to rule these 
people. It'll be only the first trip that will make you lonely, 
and it won't be long." 

" I know ; but suppose anything should happen to you ! " 

He laughed confidently. 

" Nonsense t " he exclaimed. " You know nothing ever 
does happen to me! Everything will be all right, my bestbeloved. Only a httle patience and a little courage, that's all 
we need now. You'll see .' " 

Till late that night, sheltered in their cave, they talked of 
this momentous step. Redly their firelight glowed upon 
their walls and roof, where sparkled myriads of tiny rockfacets. Far below the rapids of New Hope River murmured a contra-bass to their voices. 

And in the canon the sighing of the night-wind, pierced 
now and then by some strange cry of beast-life from the 
forest beyond, heightened their pleasant sense of security. 
Only the knowledge of approaching separation weighed 
heavy on their souls. 

From every possible standpoint they discussed the situation. Allan's plan, viewed with the eye of reason, was 
really the only sane one. Nothing could have been more 
absurdly wasteful of time and energy than the idea of carrying the girl down into the Abyss each time and bringing her 
up with every return. 

Not only would it expose her needlessly to very grave 
perils, but it would bisect the efficiency of the Pauillac. 
Allan realized, moreover, that in the rebuilding of the world 
a time must inevitably come when he could not always stand 




498 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

by her side. She must learn self-reliance, harsh as that 
teaching might seem. 

All this and much more he pointed out to her. And before 
midnight she, too, agreed. It was definitely decided that 
he was to undertake the transportation work alone. 

Thus the matter was settled. But on that night there was 
little sleep for either of them. For, on the day after the 
morrow was to commence their first separation since the 
time they had awakened in the tower, more than a year ago. 

Separation ! 

The thought weighed leaden on Allan's heart. As for 
Beatrice, though in the dark she hid her tears, she felt 
that grief could plumb no blacker depths save utter loss. 
Only the thought of the new world and all that it must 
mean steeled her to resignation. 

Morning dawned, aflare with light and color, as only a 
June morning in that semitropic wilderness could glow. 
Allan and Beatrice, early at work, resolutely attacked their 
labor of preparation. 

First of all they laid in adequate supplies of fruit and 
game, both of which, in that virgin wild, were to be had 
in a profusion undreamed of in the old days of civilization. 
With an improvised lance Allan also speared three salmon 
in the rapids. The game and fish he dressed for her and 
packed among green leaves in the cool recesses at the extreme inner end of the cavern. 

" No need whatever for you to leave the cave while I'm 
gone," he warned her. " I'm not forbidding you to, because 
I'm not your master. All I say is I'll be far happier if you 
stay close at home. Will you promise me that, whatever 
happens, you won't wander from the cave?" 

" I needn't promise, dearest. All I need to know is your 
wish. That's enough for me ! " 

Together they set about fortifying the place. Tbcy buik 
a rough but strong barricade of rocks across the mouth 



SEPARATION 499 

of the cavern, leaving only one small aperture, just sufficient to admit a single person on hands and knees. 

Allan fetched a rounded stone that she could roll into 
this door by night and arranged a stout sapling to brace 
the stone immovably. He supplied her well with fire-wood 
and saw to it that her bandoliers were full of cartridges. 
In addition, he left her the extra gun and ammunition they 
had found in the crypt under the cathedral. 

With a torch he carefully explored every crevice of the 
cave to make sure no noxious spiders, centipedes, or serpents were sheltered there. 

From the Pauillac he brought his own cloak, which he 
insisted on her keeping. This, with hers, would add to the 
comfort of the bed they had made with fragrant ferns and 
grasses. 

He fashioned, out of the tenacious clay of an earth-bank 
about half a mile down stream, two large water-jars, and 
baked them for some hours in a huge fire on the terrace 
in front of the cave. 

When properly hardened he scoured them carefully with 
river-sand and filled them one at a time, struggling up the 
hard ascent with a stout heart  for all this toil meant safety 
for the girl; it was all another step on the hard pathway 
toward the goal. 

In her sleep that night he bent above her, kissed her 
tenderly, and realized how inexpressibly dear she was to 
him. 

The thought : " To-morrow I must leave her! " weighed 
heavy on him. And for a long time he could not sleep, 
but lay listening to the night sounds of the forest and the 
brawling stream. Once a deep, booming roar echoed 
throughout the caiion, and thereto, hollow blows. 

But Allan could not think their meaning. Only he knew 
the wild was full of perils; and in his mind he reviewed 
the precautions he had taken for her welfare. Bit by bit 
he analyzed them. He knew that he could do no more. 
Now Fate must solve the rest. 




500 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

He slept at length, not to waken till morning with its 
garish eye peeped in around the crevices of the rock doorway. Returning from his swim in the pool, he found Beatrice already making breakfast. They ate in silence, overborne with sad and bodeful thoughts. 

But now the decision had been made, nothing remained 
save to execute it. Such a contingency as backing out of 
an undertaking once begun lay far outside their scheme of 
things. 

The leave-taking was not delayed. They both realized 
that an early start was necessary if he were to reach the 
village of the Folk before sleep should assail him. Still 
more, they dreaded the departure less than the suspense. 

Together they provisioned the Pauillac, back there on the 
rocky barren, and made sure everything was in order. Allan 
assured himself especially that he had fuel enough to last 
four or five hours. 

 In that time,' he told the girl, " I can easily reach the 
rim of the Abyss. You see, I needn't fly northward to the 
point where we emerged. That would be only an unnecessary waste of time and energy. Tm positive the chasm 
extends all the way up and down what was once the Mississippi Valley, and that the Great Central Sea is fed by 
that and other rivers. In that case, by striking almost due 
west, I can reach the rim. After that I can volplane easily 
till I sight the water.' 
And then?" 

Then the power goes on again and I scout for the west 
shore and the village. The sustaining power of that lowerlc\ cl air is simply miraculous. I realize perfectly well it's 
no child's play, but I can do it. Beta. I can find the place 
again. You see, Fm perfectly familiar with conditions down 
there now. The first time it was all new and strange. This 
time, after all those months in the Abyss, why, it will be 
almost like getting back home again. It'll be quite a triumphal return, won't it? The chief getting back to his 
tribe, eh ? " 






SEPARATION SOI 

He tried to speak lightly, but his lips refused to smile. 
She frankly wept. 

" There, there, little girl," he soothed her. " Now let's 
go back to the cave and see that you're all right and safe. 
Then I'll be going. Remember on the third night to kindle 
the big fire we've agreed on just outside your door on the 
terrace  the beacon-fire, you know. I'll have to reckon 
by the chronometer, so as to make the return by night. 
The risk of bringing any of the Folk into daylight is prohibitive. And the fire will be tremendously important. 1 
can sight it a long way off. It will guide me home  to 
you ! " 

She nodded silently, for she did not trust herself to 
speak. Hand in hand they returned along the path they 
had beaten through the rank half-tropic growth. 

One last inspection he gave to all things necessary for 
her comfort. Then, standing in the warm, bright sunlight 
on the ledge before the new home, he took her in his arms. 

A long embrace, a parting kiss that clung; then he was 
gone. 

Not long after the girl, still standing there upon the windswept terrace overlooking New Hope River, heard the rapid 
chatter of the engine high in air and rapidly approaching. 

A swift black shadow leaped the canon and swept away 
across the plain. Far aloft she saw the skimming Pauillac, very small and black against the dazzling blue. 

Did Allan wave a hand to her? Could she hear his farewell cry? 

Impossible to tell. Her ears, confused by the roaring of 
the rapids, her eyes dazzled by the shimmer of the morning 
heavens and dimmed by burning tears, refused to serve her. 

But bravely she waved her cloak on high. Bravely she 
strove to watch the arrow-flight of the swift bird-man till 
the tiny machine dwindled to a moving blur, a point, a mere 
speck on the far horizon, then vanished in the blue. 




50 



DARKNESS AND DAWN 



Choked with anguish, against which all her courage, all 
her philosophy could not make way, Beatrice sank down 
upon the rocky ledge and abandoned herself to grief. 

Allan was gone at last! Gone ever to return? 

At last she was alone in the unbrdcen wilderness I 



CHAPTER XI 

" HAIL TO THE MASTER I" 

Eleven hours of incessant labor, care, watchfulness and 
fatigue, three hours of flight and eight of coasting into the 
terrific depths, brought Allan once more through the fogs, 
the dark, the heat, to sight of the vast sunken sea, five hundred miles below the surface. 

Throughout the whole stupendous labor he thanked 
Heaven the girl was safely left behind, nor forced to share 
this travail and exhaustion. Myriad anxieties and fears 
assailed him  fears he had taken good care not to let her 
know or dream of. 

Always existed the chance that something might go wrot 
about the machine and it be hurled, with him, into that 
black and steaming sea ; the possibility of landing not among 
the Folk, but in some settlement of the Lanskaarn on the 
rumored islands he had never seen ; the menace of the Great 
Vortex, of which he knew nothing save the little that the 
patriarch had told him. 

All these and many other perils sought to force themselves upon his mind. But Allan put them resolutely back 
and, guided by his instruments, his reason, and that marvelous sixth sense of location which his long months of 
battling with the wilderness had brought to birth in him, 
swiftly yet carefully slid in vast spirals down the purple, 
then the black and terrifying void that yawned interminably 
below. 

The beam of his underslung searchlight, shifting at his 
will, shot its white ray in a long, fading pencil downward 

503 . 



504 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

as he coasted. And hour after hour it found nothing whereon to rest. It, too, seemed lost forever in the welter of uprushing, choking vapors from the pit. 

"Ah! At last r' 

The cry, dull in that compressed air, burst triumphantly 
from his lips as the light-ray, suddenly piercing a rift of 
cloud, sparkled dimly on a surface shiny-black as newly 
cleft anthracite. 

Allan threw in the motor once more and quickly got the 
Pauillac under control. In a long downward slant he 
rushed, like some vast swallow skimming a pool, over the 
mysterious plain of steaming waters. And ever, peering 
eagerly ahead, he sought a twinkle of the fishermen's oilflares wimpling across the sunken sea. 

Moment by moment he consulted his instruments and the 
chart he had stretched before him under the gleam of the 
hooded bulbs. 

" Inside of half an hour now," said he, " I ought to sight 
the first flash of the flares upon the parapet  the glow of 
the flaming well ! " 

And a singular eagerness all at once possessed him, a 
strange yearning to behold once more the strange, fogshrouded, reeking City of the Lost People, almost as though 
it had been home, as though these white barbarians had 
been his own people. 

Men ! To see men once more ! The idea leaped up and 
gripped him with a powerful fascination. 

So it was that when in reality the first faint twinkle of 
the fishing-boats peeped through the mist  and beyond, a 
iny necklace of gleaming points that he knew marked the 
walls of the town  his heart throbbed hotly and a cry of 
eager greeting welled from his soul. 

Quickly the Pauillac swept him onward. Manceuvering 
cautiously, jockeying the great machine with that consummate skill he had acquired from long practise, he soon beheld 
the dim outlines of the vast cliflF, the long walls, the dull 
reflections of the fire-plume, the slanting slope of beach. 



'HAILTO THE MASTER!" 505 

And with keen exultation, thrilled with his triumph and 
his greeting to the Folk he came to rescue, he landed with 
a whir upon the reeking slope. 

To him, even before he had been able to free his cramped 
body from the saddle, came swarming the people, with loud 
cries of welcome and rejoicing. Powerfully the automatics 
he and Beatrice had used in the Battle of the Walls had 
impressed their simple minds with almost superstitious 
reverence. More powerfully still his terrible fight with 
Kamrou, ending with the death of that great chief in the 
boiling vat. And now, acknowledging him their overlord 
and ruler, whom they had feared to lose forever, they 
trooped in wild, disordered throngs to do him reverence. 

In from the sea, summoned by waving flares, the fishingboats came plowing mightily, driven by many paddles in the 
hands of the strange, white-haired men. 

Along the beach the townsfolk thronged, and down the 
causeway, beneath the vast monolithic plinth of the fortified 
gate, jostled and pushed an ever-growing multitude. 

Cries of " Kromno h'viat! Tai Kromno!" reechoed  
" The chief has come back I The great master ! "  and the 
confusion swelled to a mighty roar, close-pent under the 
heavy mists blued by the naphtha-torches. 

But Stern noticed, and rejoiced to see it, that none prostrated themselves. None fell to earth or groveled in his 
presence. Disorderly and wild the greeting was, but it 
was the greeting of men, not slaves, 

" Thank God, I've got a race of real men to deal with 
here I " thought he, surveying the pressing throng. " Hard 
they may be to rule, and even turbulent, but they're not servile. Rude, brave, bold  what better stock could I have 
hoped for in this great adventuring?" 

For a while even thoughts of Beatrice were crowded 
back by the excitement of the arrival. In all his wonderful experience never before had he sensed a feeling such 
as this. 

To be returning, master and lord of a race of long-buried 




So6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

people, his own people, after all  to be acknowledged chieftain  to hold their destinies within his hand for good or 
evil  the magnitude of the situation, the tremendous difficulties and responsibilities, almost overwhelmed him. 

He felt a need to rest, and think, and plan, to recuperate 
from the long journey and to recover poise and strength. 

And with relief, as he raised his hand for silence, he perceived the wrinkled face of one Vreenya, head councillor 
of Kamrou, his predecessor. 

Him he summoned to come close, and to him gave his 
orders. With some degree of fluency  for in the months 
Beatrice and he had spent in the Abyss they had acquired 
much of the Merucaan tongue  he said: 

" I greet you, Vreenya. I greet my people, all. Harken. 
I have made a long journey to return to you. I am tired 
and would rest. There be many things to tell you, but not 
now. I would sleep and eat. Is my house in readiness ? " 

" It is in readiness  the house of the Kromno. Your 
word is our law. It shall be as you have spoken." 

" That is good. Now it is my will that this air-boat on 
which I ride should be carried close up to the walls and 
carefully covered with mantles, especially this part," and 
he gestured at the engines. " After that I rest." 

" So it shall be," Vreenya made answer, while the Folk 
listened. "But, master, where is the wcMnan? Where is 
the ancient man, J'hungaav, who sailed with you iu the 
air-boat to those upper regions we know not of?" 

' The woman is well. She awaits in a place we have 
prepared for you." 

" It is well. And the ancient man? " 

Stern thought quickly. To confess the patriarch's death 
would certainly be fatal to the undertaking. These simple 
minds would judge from it that certain destruction must 
be the portion of any who should dare venture into those 
mysterious upper regions which to them were but a myth, 
a strange tradition  almost a terror. 



"HAILTO THE MASTER!" 507 

And though the truth was dear to him, yet under stress 
of the greater good he uttered falsehood by implication. 

" The ancient mail awaits you, too. He is resting in the 
far places. He would desire you to come to him." 

" He is at peace? He found the upper world good? " 

" He found it good, Vreenya. And he is at peace." 

" It is well. Now the commands of Tat Krotnno shall 
be done. His house is ready!" 

While Stern clambered out of the machine and stretched 
his half- paralyzed limbs, the news ran, a murmur of many 
voices, through the massed Folk. Stem's heart swelled 
with pride at the success so far of his mission. If all 
should go as well from now on, his mighty object could 
and would be accomplished. But if not  

He shuddered slightly despite himself, for to his mind 
arose the everpresent possibility of the Folk's custom of 
trial by combat  the chance that some rebellious one might 
challenge him  that the outcome might another time turn 
against him. 

He remembered still the scream of Kamrou as the deposed 
chieftain had plunged into the boiling pool. What if this 
fate should some time yet be hisf And once more thoughts 
of Beatrice obtruded ; and, despite himself, he felt the clutch 
of terror at his heart. 

He put it resolutely away, however, for he realized that 
all depended now on maintaining good courage and a bold, 
commanding air. The slightest weakness might at any 
time prove fatal. 

He understood enough of the barbarian psychology to 
know the value of dominance. And with a command to 
Vreenya : " Make way for me, your master ! " he advanced 
through the lane which the crowding Folk made for him, 

As, followed by the councillor and the elders, he climbed 
the slippery causeway and passed through the labyrinthine 
passes of the great gate, strange emotions stirred him. 

The scene was still the same as when he first had witnessed it. Still flared the torches in the hands of the popu



5o8 DARKNESS AND DAWN . 

lace and along the walls, where, perched on the very ledge 
of the one-time battle with the Lanskaam, the strange waterfowl still blinked their ghostly eyes. 

No change was to be witnessed in the enclosure, the huts, 
the wide plaza, stretching away to the cliff, to the fire-pit, 
and the Dungeon of Skeletons. But still how different was 
it all! 

Only too clearly he remembered the first time he and 
Beatrice had been thrust into this weird community, bound 
and captive ; with only too vivid distinctness he recsdled the 
frightful indignities, perils and hardships inflicted on them. 

The absence of the kindly patriarch saddened him; and, 
too, the fact that now no Beatrice was with him there. 

Slowly, wearily, he moved along the slippery rock-floor 
toward his waiting house, unutterably lonesome even in this 
pushing throng that now acclaimed him, yet thanking God 
that the grl, at least, was far from the buried town of 
such hard ways and latent perils. 

At the door of the round, conical stone hut that had 
been Kamrou's and now was his  so long as he could hold 
the chieftainship by sheer force of will and power  he 
paused a moment and faced the eager throng. 

" Peace to you, my people ! " he exclaimed, once more 
raising his hand on high. " Soon I shall teU you many 
wonders and things strange to hear  many things of great 
import and good tidings. 

" When I have slept I shall speak with you. Now I go 
to rest. Await me, for the day of yotu: deliverance is at 
hand ! " 

A face caught his attention, a sinister and.brutal face, 
doubly ominous in the flaring cresset-glare. He knew the 
man  H'yemba, the cunning ironsmith, one who in other 
days had before now crossed his will and, dog-like, snarled 
as much as he had dared. Now a peculiarly malevolent expression lay upon the evil countenance. The dead-white 
skin wrinkled evilly ; the pink eyes gleamed with di8concex:ting malice. 



"HAIL TO THE MASTER!" 



509 



But Stern, dead tired, only glanced at H'yemba for a 
second, then with Vreenya entered the hut and bade the 
door be closed. 

All dressed as he was, he flung himself upon the rude 
bed of seaweed covered with the coarse brown stuff woven 
by the Folk. 

" Sleep, master," Vreenya said. " I will sit here and 
watch. But before you sleep loosen the terrible fire-bow 
that shoots the bolts of lead and lay it near at hand." 

"You mean  there may be trouble here?" 

" Sleep ! " was all the councillor would answer. " When 
you have rested there will be many things to ask and tell." 

Spent beyond the power of any further effort, Stern 
laid his automatic handy and disposed himself to rest. 

As his weary eyelids closed and the first outposts of 
consciousness began to fall before the attacking power of 
slumber, his thoughts, his love, his enduring passion, reverted to the girl, the wife, now so infinitely far away 
in the cavern beside the brawling canon-stream. Yearning and tenderness unspeakable flooded his soul. 

But once or twice her face faded from his mental vision 
and in its stead he seemed to see again the surly stare, 
the evil eyes, and venomously sinister expression of 
H'yemba, the resourceful man of fire and of steel, 



/ 




CHAPTER XII 

CHALLENGED ! 

After many hours of profound and dreamless sleep, Allan 
awoke filled with fresh vigor for the tasks that lay ahead. 
His splendid vitality, quickly recuperating, calmed his mind; 
and now the problems, the anxieties and fears of the day 
before to call it such, though there was neither night nor 
day in this strange place  seemed negligible. 

Only a certain haunting uneasiness about the girl still 
clung to him. But, sending her many a thought of love, 
he reflected that soon he should be back again with her; 
and so, resolutely grasping the labor that now awaited him, 
he felt fresh confidence and hope. 

After a breakfast of the familiar sea-weeds, bulbs, fish 
and eggs, he bade Vreenya (who seemed devotion incarnate) summon the folk for a great charweg, or tribal council, 
at the Place of Skeletons. 

Here they gathered, men, women and children, all of 
fifteen hundred, in close-packed, silent masses, leaving only 
the inner circle under the stone posts and iron rods dear 
for Allan and for Vreenya and some half-dozen elders. 

The rocky plaza-floor sloping upward somewhat from 
the dungeon, formed a very shallow natural amphitheater, 
so that the majority could see as well as hear. 

No platform was there for their Kromno to speak from. 
He had not even a block of stone. In the true native style 
he was expected to address them on their own level, pacing 
back and forth the while. 

In his early days among them he had seen one or two 
such gatherings. His quick wit prompted a close imitation 
of their ceremonies and ancient customs. 



CHALLENGED ! 511 

First, Vreenya sprinkled the open space between the 
poles and the dungeon with a kind of sea-weed swab dipped 
in the waters of the boiling vat, then with a bit of the 
coarse brown cloth washed Allan's lips  a pledge of truth. 

The councillor raised both hands toward the roaring flame 
back there by the ctifF, and all inclined themselves thereto, 
the only trace of any religious ceremony still remaining 
among them. 

Allan likewise saluted the flame ; then he faced the miillilude. 

" O my people," he began, striving to speak clearly above 
the noise of the fire-jet. his voice sounding dull and heavy 
in that compressed atmosphere, "O Folk of the Menicaans, 
I greet you ! There be many things to tell that you must 
know and believe. I have come back to you with great 
peril in my flying-boat to tell you of the upper world and 
all its goodness. 

" Easily could I have stayed in those places of light and 
plenty, but my heart was warm for my people. I thought 
of my people night and day. The woman Beatrice thought 
of you. The ancient man thought of you. Alone, we could 
not enjoy those happy places. So I returned to tell you and 
to show you the way to liberty. Thus have we proved 
our love for you, my folk ! " 

He paused. Silence overhung the assemblage save for 
the fretful cry of children here and there, squeezed in the 
press or clinging to their mothers' backs after the fashion 
of the Merucaans. 

Afar, on the walls, the faint and raucous quarreling of 
the sea-birds drifted through the fog, Allan drew breath 
an'd began again: 

" In those places, my people, those far places whence your 
forefaiiiers came, are many wonders. Betimes it is dark. 
as always here. Betimes a great fire mounts inio the upper 
air and make the whole world brighter than around your 
flaming well. In the dark time lesser fires travel in the 
air. Of birds there are many kinds, strangely colored. 



" 




512 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Of beasts, many kinds  I cannot make you understand 
because none of you have ever seen any animal but fish/ 
and bird. But I speak truth. There be many other creatures with good flesh to eat, and the skins of them are proper 
for soft clothing. 

" Here you have only weeds of the sea. There we have 
tall growing things, many hundred spedi high, and rich fruit, 
delicious to the taste, grows on some kinds. In a few 
words, it is a place of wondrous plenty, where you can all 
live more easily than here, and with more pleasure  far  " 

Again he ceased his discourse, but still continued to pace 
up and down the open space under the swaying skeletons 
on the poles above. 

Through the dense press of the Folk murmurs were 
wandering. Man spoke to man, and many a new thought 
was coming now to birth among those white barbarians. 

The elders, too, were whispering together: "So runs 
the ancient tradition. So said the ancient man! Can it 
be true, indeed ? " 

Stem continued, more and more earnestly, with the 
sweat now beginning to dot his brow: 

" It were too long, my people, to tell yo' everything 
about that land of ours above. Only rememb ; it is richer 
far and far more beautiful than this, your pla e of darkness 
and of clouds. It is the ancient home of you fathers in the 
very long ago. It is waiting for you onre again, more 
fertile and more beautiful than ever. My errand is to 
carry you thither  two or three at a time. At last I shall 
be able to take you all. 

" Then the world will begin to be as it once was, before 
the great explosion destroyed all but a few of your people, 
who were my people once. Will any of you  any two bold 
men  believe my words and go with me? Will any be as 
l)rave as  the patriarch ? " 

lie flung the veiled taunt loudly at them, with a raising 
of both arms. 

 I have spoken truth ! Now answer I ' 



CHALLENGED ! 513 

He ceased, and for a short minute there was silence. 
Then spoke Vreenya ; 

"O Kromtio, master! We would question you!" 

" I will answer and say only the thing that is." 

" First, can our people live in that other, hghter air? " 

" They can live. We have prepared caves for you. At 
first you shall not see the light. Only little by little you 
shall see it, and you and your children will change, till at 
last you shall be as I am and as your people were in the 
old daysl " 

Vreenya pondered, while tense interest held the elders 
and the Folk. Then he nodded, for his understanding  
like that of all  was keen in spite of his savagery. 

" And we can eat, O Kromnof This flesh of beasts 
you speak of may be good. This strange fruit may be good. 
I know not. It may also be as the poison weeds of our sea 
to us. But, if so, there are fish in those waters of the 
upper world? " 

"There are fish, Vreenya, and of the best, and many! 
Near the caves runs a river  " 

"A what, master?" 

" A going of the waters. In those waters live fish without number. At the dark times you can catch them with 
nets, even as here. The dark times are half of each day. 
You shall have many hours for the fishing. Even that will 
suffice to live ; but the flesh and fruits will not hurt you. 
They are good. There will be food for all, and far more 
than enough for all ! " 

Vreenya pondered again. 

" We would talk together, we elders," he said, simply. 

"It meets my pleasure," answered Allan. "And when 
ye have talked, I desire your answer! " 

He crossed his arms, faced the multitude, and waited, 
while the elders gathered in a little group by the dungeon 
and for some minutes conferred in low and earnest tones. 

Outwardly, the man seemed calm, but his soul burned 
within him and his heart was racing violently. 



 



I 




514 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

For on this moment, he well knew, hung the world's 
destiny. Should they decide to venture forth into the 
outer world all would be well. If not, the long labor, the 
plans, the hopes were lost forever. 

Well he knew the stubborn nature of the Folk. Once 
their minds set, nothing on earth could ever stir them. 

'' Thank God I managed that lie about the patriarch I " 
thought Allan quickly. ''If I'd slipped up on that, and 
told them he died at the very minute the sunlight struck 
him, it would have been all off, world without end. Hope 
it doesn't make a row later. But if it does, I'll face it. 
The main and only thing now is to get 'em started. They've 
got to go, that's all there is about it. 

" Gad ! After all, it's a terrific proposition I'm putting 
up to these simple fishers of the Abyss. I'm asking them, 
just on my say-so, to root up the life, the habits, the traditions of more than a thousand years and make a leap into 
the dark  into the light, I mean. 

" I'm asking them to leave everything they've ever known 
for thirty generations and take a chance on what to them 
must be the wildest and most hair-brained adventure possible to imagine. To risk homes, families, lives, everything, 
just on my unsupported word. Jove! Columbus's proposal to his men was a mere afternoon jaunt compared with 
this! If they refuse, how can I blame them? But if they 
accept  God ! what stuff I'll know they're made of ! With 
material like that to work with, the conquest of the world's 
in sight already." 

His eyes, wandering nervously along the front ranks of 
the waiting Folk, dimly illumined by the dull blue glow of 
the fire-well that shone through the mist, suddenly stopped 
with apprehension. His brows contracted, and on his heart 
it seemed as though a gripping hand had suddenly laid hold. 

"H'yemba, the smith, again! Damn him I H'yemba!" 
he muttered, in sudden anger strongly tinged with fear. 

The smith, in fact, was standing there a little to the left 
of him, huge and sinewed hands loosely clasped in front of 



CHALLENGED! 515 

him, face sinister, eyes glowing like two malevolent evil 
fires. 

Allan noted the defiant poise of the body, the vast 
breadth of the shoulders, the heavy hang of the arms, 
bleeped like a gorilla's. 

For a minute the two men looked each other steadfastly 
in the eye, each measuring the other. Then suddenly the 
voice of Vreenya broke the tension, 

" O Kromno, we have spoken. Will you hear us ? " 

Stern faced him, a strange sinking at his heart, almost 
as though the foreman of a jury stood before him to announce either freedom or sentence of death. 

But, holding himself in check. lest any sign of fear or 
nervousness betray him, he made answer: 

" I will hear you. Speak! " 

" We have listened to your words. We believe you 
speak truth. Yet  " 

" Yet wkatf Out with it, man 1 " 

" Yet will we not compel any man to go. All shall be 
free  " 

" Thank God ! " breathed Allan, with a mighty sigh. 

"  Free to stay or go, as they will. Our village is too 
full, even now. We have many children. It were well 
that some should make room for others. Those who dare, 
have our consent. Now, speak you to the people, your 
people, O Kromno, and see who chooses the upper world 
with you ! " 

Once more Allan turned toward the assemblage. But 
before he had found time to frame the first question in this 
unfamiliar speech, a disturbance somewhat to the left interrupted him. 

There came a jostling, a pushing, a sound of voices in 
amazement, anger, approbation, doubt. 

Into the clear space stepped H'yemba, the smith. His 
powerful right hand he raised on high. And boldly, in a 
kjud voice, he cried; 

"Folk of the Merucaans, this cannot be!" 



/ 




CHAPTER XIII 

THE RAVISHED NEST 

" It cannot be ? Who says it cannot be? Who dares stand 
out and challenge me?" 

 I, H'yemba, the man of iron and of flame! " 

Stern faced him, every nerve and fiber quivering with 
sudden passion. At realization that in the exact psychological moment when success lay almost in his hand, this 
surly brute might baffle him, he felt a wave of murderous 
hate. 

He realized that the dreaded catastrophe had indeed come 
to pass. Now his sole claim to chieftainship lay in his 
power to defend the title. Failure meant  death. 

" You ? " he shouted, advancing on the smith. 

His opponent only leered and grimaced offensively. Then 
without even having vouchsafed an answer, he swung toward the elders. 

 I challenge ! " he exclaimed. " I have the right of 
words ! " 

Vreenya nodded, fingering his long white beard. 

 Speak on ! " he answered. " Such is our ancient cus


tom. ' 



if 



Oh, people,' cried the smith, suddenly facing the throng, 
will ye follow one who breaks the tribal manners of our 

folk? One who disdains our law? Who has neglected to 

obey it ? Will ye trust yourselves into hands stained with 

law-breaking of our blood ? " 
A murmur, doubtful, wondering, obscure, spread through 

the people. By the greenish flare-light Stem could see 

516 



THE RAVISHED NEST 517 

looks of wonder and dismay. Some frowned, others stared 
at him or at the smith, and many muttered. 

" What the devil and all have I broken noivf " woadered 
Allan. " Plague take these barbarous customs 1 Jove, 
they're worse than the taboos of the old Maoris, in the 
ancient days I What's up ? " 

He had not long to wonder, for of a sudden H'yemba 
wheeled on him. pointed him out with vibrant hands, and in 
a voice of terrible anger cried: 

"The law, the law of old! No man shall be chief who 
does not take a wife from out our people! None who 
weds one of the Lanskaarii, the island folk, or the yellowhaired Skeri beyond the Vortex, none such shall ever rule 
us. Yet this man. this stranger who speaks such great 
things very hard to be believed, scorns our custom. No 
woman from among us he has taket but instead, that . 
vuedma of his own kind! What? Will ye  " ' 

He spoke no further, for Allan was upon him with one 
leap. At sound of that word, the most injurious in their 
tongue, the fires of Hell burst loose in Stern. 

Reckoning no consequences, staying for no parley or 
diplomacy, he sprang; and as he sprang, he struck. 

The blow went home on the smith's jaw with a smash 
like a pile-driver. H'yemba, reeling, swung at him  no 
skill, no science, just a wild, barbaric, sledge-hammer ' 
sweep. I 

It would have killed had it landed, but Allan was not ' 
there. In point of tactics, the twentieth century met the 
tenth. , 

And as the smith whirled to recover, a terrible left-hander < 
met him just below the short ribs. 

With a grunt the man doubled, sprawled and fell. By some 
strange atavism, which he never afterward could under- < 
stand, Allan counted, in the Folk's tongue: " JIathi, ko, 
zem, haku  " and so up to "lamnu"  ten. 
I Still the smith did not rise, but only lay and groaned and f 
sought to catch the breath that would not come. 



f 




Si8 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" I have won ! " cried Allan in a loud voice. " Here, you 
people, take this greun, this child, away ! And let there be 
no further idle talk of a dead law  for surely, in your custom, a law dies when its champion is beaten 1 Come, quick, 
away with him ! " 

Two stout men came forward, bowed to Allan with hands 
clasped upon their breasts in signal of fresh all[iance, and 
without ceremony took the insensible smith, neck-and-heels, 
and lugged him off as though he had only been a net heavily 
laden with fish. 

The crowd opened in awed silence to let them pass. By 
the glare Allan noticed that the man's jaw hung oddly 
awry, even as the obeah's had hung, in Madison Forest. 

" Jove, what a wallop that must have been ! " thought he, 
now perceiving for the first time that his knuckles were 
cut and bleeding. ' Old Monahan himself taught me that 
in the Harvard gym a thousand odd years ago  and it still 
works. One question settled, mighty quick; and H'yemba 
won't have much to say for a few weeks at least Not 
till his jawbone knits again, anyhow 1' 

Upon his arm he felt a hand. Turning, he saw Vreenya, 
the aged counselor. 

" Surely, O master, he shall not live, now you have conquered him? The boiling pit awaits. It is our custom  if 
you will ! " 

Allan only shook his head. 

"All customs change, these times,' he answered. "/ 
am your law ! This man's life is needed, for he has good 
skill with metals. He shall live, but never shall he speak 
before the Folk again. I have said it ! " 

To the waiting throng he turned again. 

" Ye have witnessed ! " he cried, in a loud voice.  Now, 
have fear of me, your master! Once in the Battle of the 
Walls ye beheld death raining from my fire-bow. Once 
ye watched me vanquish your ruler, even the great Kamrou 
himself, and fling him far into the pit that boils. And now, 
for the third time, ye have seen. Remember well I " 



THE RAVISHED NEST 519 

A stir ran through the multitude. He felt its potent 
meaning, and he understood. 

" I am the law ! " he flung at them once more, " Declare it, all! Repeat! " 

The thou sand- throated chorus: "Thou art the law!" 
boomed upward through the fog, rolled mightily against 
the towering cliff, and echoed thundcrlike across the hot, 
black sea. 

" It is well ! " he cried. " One more sleep, and then  thcn 
I choose from among ye two for the journey, two of your 
boldest and best. And that shall be the first journey of 
many, up to tlie better places that await ye, far beyond the 
pit ! " 

Straining his eyes in the night, pierced only by the electric beam that ran and quavered rapidly over the broken 
forest-lops far below, Allan peered down and far ahead. 
The fire, the signal-rtre he had told Beatrice to build upon 
the ledge  would he never sight it? 

Eagerly he scanned the dark horizon only just visible in 
the star-shine. Warmly the rushing night wind fanned his 
cheek; the roar of the motor and propellers, pulsating 
mightily, made music to his ears. For it sang: "Home 
again! Beatrice, and love once more!" 

Many long hours had passed since, his fuel-tanks replenished from the apparatus for distilhng the crude naphtha, 
which he had installed during his first stay in the Abyss, 
he had risen a second time into that heavy, humid, purplevapored air. 

With him he now bore Brcmilu, the strong, and Zangamon, most cxpct of all the fishermen. Slung in the baggage-crate aft lay a large seine, certain supplies of fish, 
weed and eggs, and  from time to time noisily squawking 
 some half-dozen of the strange sea-birds, in a metal 
basket. 

The pioneers had insisted on taking these impedimenta 



f 




520 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

with them, to bridge the gap of changed conditions, a precaution Stern had recognized as eminently sensible. 

" Gad ! " thought he, as the Pauillac swept its long, flatarc'd trajectory through the night, "under any drcumstances this must be a terrific wrench for them. Talk 
about nerve! If they haven't got it, who has? This trip 
of these subterranean barbarians, thus flung suddenly into 
midair, out into a world of which they know absolutely 
nothing, must be exactly what a journey to Mars would 
mean to me. More, far more, to their simple minds. I 
wonder myself at their courage in taking such a tremendous step." 

And in his heart a new and keener admiration for the 
basic stamina of the Merucaans took root. 

" They'll do ! " he murmured, as he scanned his lighted 
chart once more, and cast up reckonings from the dials of 
his delicately adjusted instruments. 

Half an hour more of rapid flight and he deemed New 
Hope River could not now be far. 

" No use to try and hear it, though, with this racket of 
the propellers in my cars," thought he. " The searchlight 
might possibly pick up a gleam of water, if we fly over it. 
But even that's a small index to go by. The signal-fire must 
be my only real guide  and where is it, now, that fire?" 

A vague uneasiness began to oppress him. The fire, he 
reckoned, should have shown ere now in the far distance. 
Without it, how find his way? And what of Beatrice? 

His uneasy reflections were suddenly interrupted by a 
word from Zangamon, at his right. 

"O Kromno, master, see?" 

"What is it, now?" 

" A fire, very distant, master ! " 

" Where ? " queried Stern eagerly, his heart leaping with 
joy. " I see no fire. Your eyes, used to the dark places 
and the fogs, now far surpass mine, even as mine will yours 
when the time of light shall come. Where is the fire, 
Zangamon ? " 



THE RAVISHED NEST 521 

The fisher pointed, a dim huge figure in the star-lit gloom. 

" There, master. On thy left hand, thus." 

Stem shifted his course to southwest by west, and for 
some minutes held it true, so that the needle hardly trembled on the compass dial. 

Then all at once he, too, saw the welcome signal, a tiniest 
pin-prick of light far on the edge of the world, no different 
from the sixth-magnitude stars that hung just above it on 
the horizon, save for its redness. 

A gush of gratitude and love welled in the fountains of 
his heart. 

"Home!" he whispered. "Home  for where you are 
that's home to met Oh, Beatrice, I'm coming  coming 
home to you 1 " 

Slowly at first, then with greater and ever greater swiftness, the signal star crept nearer; and now even the flames 
were visible, and now behind them he caught dim sight of 
the rock-wall. 

On and on, a very vulture of the upjrer air, planed the 
Pauillac. Stern shouted with all his strength. The girl 
might possibly hear him and might come out of their cave. 
She might even signal  and the nearness of her presence 
mounted upon him like a heady wine. 

He swung the searchlight on the caiion. as they swept 
above it. He flung the pencil of radiance in a wide sweep 
up the cliff and down along the terrace. 

It gave no sight, no sign of Beatrice. 

" Sleeping, of course," he reflected. 

And now, Hope River past, and the caiion swallowed by 
the dense forest, he flung his light once more ahead. With 
it he felt out the rocky barrens for a landing-place. 

Not more than twenty minutes later, followed by Bremilu and Zangamon, Stern was making way through the 
thick-laced wood and jungle. 

Awed, terrified by their first sight of trees and by the 
upper world which to them was naught but marvel and danger, the two Merucaans followed close behind their guide. 




$22 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Even sdT would you or I cling to the Martian who should 
'landl on that ruddy planet and pilot us through some 
huge,' inchoate and grotesque growth of things to us perfectly unimaginable. 

' Oh, master, we shall see the patriarch soon ? " asked 
Bremilu, in .a strange voice  a voice to him astonishingly 
loud, in the clear air of iight upon the surface of the 
world. " Soon shall we speak with him and  " 

" Hark ! What's that ? " interrupted Stem, pausing, the 
while he gripped his pistol tighter. 

From afar, though in which direction he could not say, a 
vague, dull roar made itself heard through the forest. 

Sonorous, vibrant, menacing, it echoed and died ; and then 
again, as once before. Stern heard that strange, hollow 
booming, as of some mighty drum struck by a muffled fist. 

A cry? Was that a cry, so distant and so faint? Beastcry, or call of night-bird, shrill and far? 

Stem shuddered, and with redoubled haste once more 
pushed through the vague path he and Beatrice had made 
from the barrens to Settlement Qiffs. 

Presently, followed by the two colonists who dared not 
let him for a moment out of their sight, he reached the 
brow of the canon. His hand flash-lamp showed him the 
rough path to the terrace. 

With fast-beating heart he ran down it, unmindful of the 
unprotected edge or the sheer drop to the rocks of New 
Hope River, far below. 

Bremilu and Zangamon, seeing perfectly in the gloom, 
hurried close behind, with words of awe, wonder and admiration in their own tongue. 

" Beta ! Oh, Beatrice ! Home again ! " Stem shouted 
triumphantly. " Where are you, Beta ? Come I I'm home 
again ! " 

Quickly he scrambled along the broken terrace, stumbling 
in his haste over loose rocks and debris. Now he had 
reached the turn. The fire was in sight. 

"Beta!" again he hailed. "O-hi! Beatrice I" 



THE RAVISHED NEST 523 

Still no answer, nor any sign from her. As became to 
the fire he noted, despite his strong emotions, that it had 
for the most part burned down to glowing embers. 

Only one or two resinous knots still flamed. It could not 
have been replenished for some time, perhaps two hours 
or more. 

Again, his quick eye caught the fact that cinders, ashes 
and half-burned sticks lay scattered about in strange disorder. 

" Why, Beatrice never makes a fire like that ! " the 
thought pierced through his mind. 

And  though as yet on no very definite grounds  a 
quick prescience of catastrophe battered at his heart. 

"What's this?" 

Something lying on the rock-ledge, near the fire, caught 
his eye. He snatched it up. 

"What  what can this mean?" 

The colonists stood, frightened and confused, peering at 
him in the dark. His face, in the ruddy fire-glow, as he 
studied the thing he now held in his hand, must have been 
very terrible. 

"Cloth! Torn I But but then" 

He flung from him the bit of the girl's cloak which, ripped 
and shredded as though by a powerful hand, cried disaster. 

" Beatrice ! " he shouted. " Where are you ? Beatrice ! " 

To the doorway in the cliff he ran, shaken and trembling. 

The stone had been pushed away; it lay inside the cave. 
Ominously the black entrance seemed staring at him in the 
dull gleam of the firelight. 

On hands and knees he fell, and hastily crawled through. 
As he went, he flashed his lamp here, there, everywhere. 

" Beatrice I Beatrice! " 

No answer. 

In the far corner still flickered some remainder of the 
cooking-fire. But there, too, ashes and half-bumed sticks 
lay scattered all about. 

To the bed he ran. It was empty and cold. 




524 DARKNESS AND DAWN 



"Beatrice! Oh, my God!" 

A glint of something metallic on the floor drew his bewildered, terror-smitten gaze. 

He sprang, seized the object, and for a moment stood 
staring, while all about him the very universe seemed 
thundering and crashing down. 

The object in his hand was the girl's gun. One cartridge, and only one, had been exploded. 

The barrel had been twisted almost off, as thoc by the 
wrenching clutch of a hand inhuman in its ghastly power. 

On the stock, distinctly nicked into the hard rubber as 
Stern held the flash-lamp to it, were the unmistakable imprints of teeth. 

With a groan, Allan started backward. The revolver 
fell with a clatter to the cave floor. 

His foot slid in something wet, scxnething sticky. 

" Blood! " he gasped. 

Half -crazed, he reeled toward the door. 

The flash-lamp in his hand flung its white brush of radiance along the vrall. 

With a chattering cry he recoiled. 

There, roughly yet unmistakably imprinted on the white 
limestone surface, he saw the print, in crimson, of a hogei 
a horrible, a brutally distorted hand. 



.. 



CHAPTER XrV 

ON THE TRAIL OF THE MONSTER 

Stern's cry of horror as he scrambled from the ravaged, 
desecrated cave, and the ghastly horror of his face, seen by 
the firelight, brought Zangamon and Bremiju to him, in 
terror. 

" Master! Master! What" 

" My God ! The girl  she's gone ! " he stammered, leaning against the cliff in mortal anguish. 

" Gone, master ? Where ? " 

" Gone ! Dead, perhaps ! Find her for rae 1 Find her ! 
You can see  in the dark! I  I am as though blind! 
Quick, on the trail!" 

" But tell us  " 

" Something lias taken her! Some savage thing! Some 
wild man! Even now he may be killing her! Quick  
after them!" 

Bremilu stood staring for a moment, unable to grasp 
this catastrophe on the very moment of arrival. But Zangamon, of swifter wit, had already fallen on his knees, there 
by the mouth of the cave, and now seeing clearly by the 
dim light which more than sufficed for him  was studying 
the traces of the struggle. 

Stern, meanwhile, clutching his head between both hands, 
dumb-mad with agony, was choking with dry sobs. 

"Master! See!" 

Zangamon held up a piece of splintered wood, with the 
bark deeply scarred by teeth. 

Stern snatched it. 

525 




526 DARKNESS AND DAWN 



" Part of the pole I gave her to brace the rock with/ he 
realized. " Even that was of no avail." 

 Master  this way they went ! " 

Zangamon pointed up along the rock-terrace. Stem's 
eyes could distinguish no slightest trace on the stone, but 
the Merucaan spoke with certainty. He added : 

"There was fighting, all the way along here, master. 
And then, here, the girl was dragged." 

Stern stumbled blindly after him as he led the way. 

"There was fighting here? She struggled?" 

"Yes, master." 

"Thank Godl She was alive here, anyhow I She 
wasn't killed in the cave. Maybe, in the open, she might   

" Now there is no more fighting, master. The wild 
thing carried her here." 

He pointed at the rock. Stem, trembling and very sick, 
flashed his electric-lamp upon it. With eyes of dread and 
horror he looked for blood-stains. 

What? A drop! With a dull, shuddering groan, he 
pressed forward again. 

Out he jerked his pistol and fired, straight up, their prearranged signal : One shot, then a pause, then two. Some 
bare possibility existed and that she still might live and 
hear and know that rescue came  if it could come before 
it were eternally too late ! 

"On, on!" cried Allan. "Go on, Zangamon! Quick! 
Lead me on the trail ! " 

The Merucaan, now aided by Bremilu, who had recovered his wits, scouted ahead like a blood-hound on the spoor 
of a fugitive. One gripped his stone ax, the other a javelin. 

Bent half double, scrutinizing in the dark the stony path 
which Allan followed behind them only by the aid of his 
flash, they proceeded cautiously up toward the brow of the 
cliff again. 

But ere they reached the top they branched off onto 
another lateral path, still rougher and more tortuous, that 
led along the breast of the canon. 



ON TRAIL OF THE MONSTER 527 

" This way, master. It was here, most surely, the thing 
carried her." 

" What kind of marks? Do you see signs of claws? " 

"Claws? What are claws?" 

" Sharp, long nails, like our nails, only much larger and 
longer. Do you see any such marks?" 

Zangamon paused a second to peer. 

" I seem to see marks as of hands, master, but  " 

" No matter 1 On I We must find her I Quick  lead 
the way!" 

Five minutes of agonizing suspense for Allan brought 
him, still following the guides, without whom all would 
have been utterly lost, to a kind of thickly wooded dell that 
descended sharply to the edge of the canon. Into this the 
trail Jed. 

Even he himself could now here and there make out, by 
the aid of his light, a broken twig, trampled ferns and 
down-crushed grass. Once he distinguished a bk>od-stain 
on a limb  fresh blood, not coagulated. A groan burst 
from between his chattering teeth. 

He turned his light on the grass beneath. All at once 
a blade moved. 

"Oh, thank God!" he wheezed. "They passed here 
only a few minutes ago. They can't be far now ! " 

Something drew his attention. He snatched at a sapling. 

"Hair!" 

Caught in a roughness of the bark a few short, stiff, wiryhairs, reddish-brown, were twisted. 

"One of the Horde?" he stammered. 

A lightning-flash of memory carried him back to Madison Forest, more than a year ago. He seemed to sec again 
the obeah, as that monster advanced upon the girl, clutching, 
supremely hideous. 

"The hair! The same kind of hairl In the power of 
the Horde ! " he gasped. 

A mental picture of extermination flashed before his 
mind's e. Whether the girl lived or died, he knew now 



528 



DARKNESS AND DAWN 



that his life worit was to inc a total slaihter of the 
Anthrtqwids. The destructioo e had already wrought 
amonp them wss but child's play o what would be. 

And in his soul flamed the loreknowledge of a hunt 
d I'outrance, to the bitter end. So long as one, a single otic 
of that foul breed should live, le would not re&t from 
killing. 

" Master 1 This way 1 Here, laster!" 

The voice of Zangamon liim once more crashing 

through the jutle, after 1 qu< sting guides. Again he 
Bred the signal-shot, and nc with the full power of his 
lungs he yelled. 

His voice rang, echoing, through the black and tangled 
growths, startling the nit-life of the depths. Something 
chippered overhead. Near-by a serpent slid away, hissing 
venwnously. Death lurked on every hand. 

Stem took no thought of it, but pressed forward, shouting the girl's name, hallooing, beating down the undergrowth with mad futy. And here, there, all about he flung 
the light-beam. 

Perhaps she mt yet hear his hails; perhaps she might 
even catch some distant glimmer uf his light, and know 
that help was coming, that resaicrs were fighting onward 
to her. 

Silent, lithe, confident even among these new and terribly strange conditions, the two men of the Folk slid through 
the jungle. 

No hounds ever trailed fugitive more surely and with 
greater skill than these strange, white barbarians from tlie 
underworld. Through all his fear and agony. Stem blessed 
their courage and their skill. ' 

"Men, by Godl They're men!" he muttered, as he 
thrashed his painful way behind thcin in the night. 

Of a sudden, there somewhere ahead, far ahead in the 
wilderness  a cry? 

Allan sttqiped short, his heart leaping. 

Again he fired, and his voice set all the ech i ringing. 




ON TRAIL OF THE MONSTER 529 

A cry ! He knew it now. There could be no mistake  
a cry! 

" Beatrice I " he shouted in a terrible voice, leaping forward. The guides broke into a crouching run. All three 
crashed through the thickets, split the fern-masses, struggled through the tall saber-grass that here and there rose 
higher than their heads. 

Allan cursed himself for a fool. That other cry he had 
heard while on his way from the Pauillac to Settlement 
Cliffs  that had been her cry for help  and he had neither 
known nor heeded. 

" Fool that I was ! Oh, damnable idiot that I was ! " he 
panted as he ran. 

From moment to moment he fired. He paused a few 
seconds to jack a fresh cartridge-clip into the automatic. 

" Thank God I've got a belt full of ammunition! " thought 
he, and again smashed along with the two Merucaans. 

All at once a formidable roar gave them pause. 

Hollow, booming, deep, yet rising to a wild shriek of 
rage and horrid brutality, the beast-cry flung itself through 
the jungle. 

And, following it, they heard ain that muffled drumming, as though gigantic fists were flailing a tremendous 
tambour in the darkness. 

" Master ! " whispered Zangamon, recoiling a step. " Oh, 
Kromno, what is that? " 

" Never have we heard such in our place ! " added Bremilu, gripping his ax the tighter. " Is that a man-cry, or 
the cry of a beast  one of the beasts you told us of, that we 
have never seen?" 

"Both! A man-beast! Kill! Kill!" 

Now, Allan, sure of his direction, took the lead. No 
longer he flashed the light, and only once more he called : 
"Beatrice! O Beatrice! We're coming!" 

Again he heard her cry, but suddenly it died as though 
swiftly choked in her very throat. Allan spat a blasphemy 
and surged on. 




S30 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

The two white barbarians followed, peering with those 
strange, pinkish eyes of theirs, courageous still, yet utterly 
at a loss to know what manner of thing they were now drawing near. 

They burst through a thicket, waded a marshy swale and 
went splashing, staggering and slipping among tufts of 
coarse and knife-edged grasses, the haunt of unknown 
venomous reptiles. 

Up a slope they won ; and now, all at once the roar burst 
forth again close at hand, a rending tumult, wild, earthshaking, inexpressibly terrible. 

All three stopped. 

"Beatrice! Are you there? Answer I" shouted Stem. 

Silence, save for a peculiar mumbling snuffle off ahead, 
among the deeper shadows of a fern-tree thicket. 

 Beatrice!" 

No answer. With a groan Allan shot his light toward the 
thicket. He seemed to distinguish something moving. To 
his ears now came a sound of twigs and brushwood snapping. 

Absolutely void of fear he pressed forward, and the two 
colonists with him, their weapons ready. Stern held his 
revolver poised for instant action. His heart was hammering, and his breath surged pantingly; but within him his 
consciousness and soul lay calm. 

For he knew one of two things were now to happen. 
Either that beast ahead there in the gloom, or be, must die. 



CHAPTER XV 

IN THE GKir OP TERROR 

As the three pursuers steadily advanced, the thing roared 
once more, and again they heard the hammering, drumming 
boom. Zangamon whispered some unintelUgible phrase, 

Allan projected the light forward again, and at sight of 
a moving mass, vague and intangible, among the gigantic 
fronds, leveled his automatic. 

But on the instant Bremilu seized his arm. 

" O master ! Do not throw the fire of death ! " he warned. 
" You cannot see, but we can ! Do not throw the fire I " 

"Why not? What is that thing?" 

" It seems a man, yet it is different, master. It is all hair, 
and very thick and strong, and hideous ! Do not shoot, O 
Kromno ! " 

"Why not?" 

" Behold ! That strange man-thing holds the woman, 
Beatrice, in his left arm. Of a truth, you may kill her, 
and not the enemy." 

Allan steadied himself against a palm. His brain seemed 
whirling, and for a moment all grew vague and like a 
dream. 

She was there  Beatrice was there, and they could see 
her. There, in the clutches of some monster, horrible and 
foul! Living yet? Dead? 

"Tell me! Does she live?" 

" We cannot say, O Kromno. But do not shoot. We 
will creep close  we, ourselves, will slay, and never touch 
the woman." 

531 



532 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

"No, no! If you do he'll strangle her  provided she 
still lives ! Don't go ! Wait I Let me think a second." 

With a tremendous effort Allan mastered himself. The 
situation far surpassed, in horror, any he had ever known. 

There not a hundred yards distant in the dense blackness 
was Beatrice, in the grip of some unknown and hideous 
creature. Advance, Allan dared not, lest the creature rend 
her to tatters. Shoot, he dared not. 

Yet something must be done, and quickly, for every second, every fraction of a second, was golden. The merest 
accident might now mean death or life  life, if the girl 
still lived ! 

" Zangamon ! " 

" Yea, master?" 

"Be very bold! Do my bidding!" 

" Speak only the word, Kromno, and I obey ! " 

" Go you, then, very quietly, very swiftly, to the other 
side of these great growing things  these trees, we call 
them. Then call, so that this thing shall turn toward you. 
Thus, I may shoot, and perhaps not kill the woman. It is 
the only way ! " 

" I hear, master. I go ! " 

Allan and Bremilu waited, while from the thicket came, 
at intervals, the savage snuffling, with now and then a 
grumbling mutter. 

All at once a call sounded from far ahead. 

" Come ! " commanded Allan. Together he and Bremilu crept through the jungle toward the thicket. 

Wide-eyed, yet seeing almost nothing, Allan crawled 
noiselessly, automatic in hand. The Merucaan slid along, 
silent as an Apache. 

" Tell me if you see the thing again  if you see it tumi  
whispered Stern. " Tell me, for you can see." 

Now the distance was cut in half ; now only a third of it 
remained. Before Stern it seemed a fathomless pit of black 
was opening. Under the close-woven arches of the giant 
fern-trccs the night was impenetrable. 



INTHEGRTPOFTERROR 533 

And as yet he dared not dart the light-beam into that 
pit of darkness, for fear of precipitating an unthinkable 
tragedy  if, indeed, the horror had not already been consummated. 

But now Brerailu gripped his arm. Afar, on the other 
side of the thicket, they heard a singular commotion, cries, 
shouts, and the vigorous beating of the fern-trees. 

" The tiling has turned, master ! " the Merucaan exclaimed, at Allan's side. " Now throw the fire-death I 
Elvurl Quickly, throw!" 

Stem swept the thicket with his beam. 

"Ah! Th&re there!" 

The light caught a moving, hairy mass of brown  a huge, 
squat, terrible creature, its back now toward them. At one 
side Stern saw a vague blackness  the long, unbound hair 
of Beatrice ! 

He glimpsed a white arm dangling limp; and in his 
breast the heart flamed at white-heat of rage and passion. 

But his hand was steel. Never in his life had he drawn 
so fine a bead. 

" Hold the light for me! " he whispered, passing it to his 
companion. " I want both hands for this! " 

Bremilu held the beam true, blinking strangely with his 
pink eyes. Stern, resting his pistol hand in the hollow 
of his left elbow, sighted true. 

A fraction of a hair to the left, and the bullet might crssh 
through the brain of Beatrice! 

" Oh. Godif there be any God  speed the shot true! " 
he prayed, and fired. 

A hideous yell, ripping the night to shreds, burst in a 
raw and rising discord through the forest  a scream as of 
a damned soul flung upon the brimstone. 

Then, as he glimpsed the while arm falling and knew 
the thing had loosed its grip, the light died. Bremilu, 
starting at the sudden discharge close to his ear, had 
pressed the ivory button. 




534 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Stem snatched for the flash-lamp, fumbled it, and dropped 
it there among the lush growths underfoot 

Before he could more than stoop to feel for it a heaVy 
crash through the wood told that the thing was charging. 

With bubbling yells it came, trampling the undergrowth, 
drumming on its huge breast, gibbering with demoniac rage 
and pain  came swiftly, like the terrific things that people 
nightmares. 

Behind it, shouts echoed. Stern heard the voice of 
Zangamon as, spear in hand, the Merucaan pursued. 

He raised his revolver once more, but dared not fire. 

Yet only an instant he hesitated, in the fear of killing 
Zangamon. 

For, quick-looming through the darkness, a huge balk, 
panting, snarling, chattering, sprang  an avalanche of muscle, bone, fur, mad with murder-rage. 

Crack! spoke the automatic, point-blank at this rushing horror, this blacker shadow in the blackness. 

The iire-stab revealed a grinning white-fanged face close 
to his own, and clutching hands, and terrible, thick, hairy 
arms. 

Then something hurled itself on Stem; something bore 
him backward  something beside which his strength was 
as a baby's  something vast, irresistible, hideous beyond all 
telling. 

Stern felt the flesh of his left arm ripped up. Crushed, 
doubled, impotent, he fell. 

And at his throat long fingers clutched. A fetid, stinking breath gushed hot upon his face. He heard the raving 
chatter of ivories, snapping to rend him. 

Up sprang another shadow. High it swung a weapon. 
The blow thudded hollow, smashing, annihilating. 

Hot liquid gushed over Allan's hand as he sought to beat 
the monster back. 

Then, fair upon him, fell a crushing weight 

Swooning, he knew no more. 



CHAPTER XVr 



A RIlSPITE I 



The bright beam of the flash-lamp in his face roused Allan 
to a consciousness that he was bruised and suffering, and 
that his left arm ached with dull insistence. Dazed, he 
brought it iip and saw his sleeve of dull brown stuff was 
dripping red. 

Beside him, in the trampled grass, he vaguely made out 
a hairy bulW, motionless and huge. Bremilu was kneeling 
beside his master, with words of cheer. 

" It is dead, O Kromno ! The man-beast is dead ! My 
stone ax broke its skull. See, now it lies here harmless 1 " 

The currents of thought began to flow once more. Allan 
struggled up, unmindful of his wounds. 

" Beatrice ! IVkcrc is the girl? " he gasped. 

As though by way of answer, the tall growths swayed 
and crackled, and through them a dim figure loomed  a man 
with something in his arms, 

" Zangamon ! " panted Allan, springing toward him. 
"Have you got her? The girl  is she alive?" 

"She lives, master!" replied a voice. "But as yet she 
remains without knowledge of aught." 

" Wounded ? Is she wounded? " 

Already he had reached Zangamon, and, injured though 
he was, had taken the beloved form in his arms. 

"Beatrice! Beatrice!" he called, pressing kisses to her 
brow, her eyes, her mouth  still warm, thank God! 

He sank down among the underbrush and gathered her 
to his breast, cradling her. cherishing her to him as though 
to bring back life and consciousness. 

 535 




536 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

To her heart he laid his ear. It beat I She breathed! 

'The light, here! Quick!" 

By its clear ray he saw her hair disheveled; her coarse 
mantle of brown stuff ripped and torn, and cm her tliroat 
long scratches. 

Bruises showed on her hands and arms, as from a terrible 
light she had put up against the monster. And his heart 
bled; and to his lips rose execrations, mingled with the 
teiiderest words of pity and love. 

" We must get her back to the cave at once ! " he exclaimed. " Quick ! Break branches. Make a litter  a bed 
 to carry her on ! Everything depends on getting her to 
shelter now ! " 

But the two Merucaans did not understand. All this 
was beyond their knowledge. Ignoring his hurts, Allan laid 
the girl down very gently, and with them set to work, directing the making of the litter. 

They obeyed eagerly. In a few minutes the litter was 
ready  made of fern-tree branches thickly covered with 
leaves and odorous grasses. 

On this he placed the girl. 

" You, Zangamon, take these boughs here. Bremilu, 
those others. Now I will hold the light. Back to the cave 
now  quick ! " 

" We need not the light, master. We see better without 
it. It dazzles our eyes. Use it for yourself. We need it 
not ! ' exclaimed Bremilu, stooping above the body of the 
dead monster to recover his ax. 

Involuntarily Allan turned the beam upon the horrible 
creature. There stood Bremilu, his foot upon the hairy 
shoulder, tugging hard at the ax-handle. Thrice he had to 
pull with all his might to loosen the blade which had buried 
itself deep in the shattered skull. 

' A giant gorilla, so help me I " he cried, shuddering. 
"My God, Beatrice  what a ghastly terror you've been 
through ! ' 

Still grioning ferociously, in death, with blood-smeared 



A RESPITE FROM TOIL 537 

face and glazed, staring eyes, the creature shocked and 
horrified even Allan's steady nerves. He gazed upon it 
only a moment, then turned away. 

" Enough ! " said he. " To the cave 1 " 

A quarter-hour had passed before they reached shelter 
again, Allan bade the Merucaans heap dry wood on the 
embers in the cavern, while he himself laid Beatrice upon 
the bed. 

With a piece of their brown cloth dipped in one of tho 
water-jars he bathed her face and bruised throat. 

" Fresh water ! Fetch a jar of fresh water from the 
river below I " he commanded Zangamon. 

But even as the white barbarian started to obey, the girl 
stirred, raised a hand, and feebly spoke. 

" Allan oh  are you here again? Allan  my love!" 

He strained her to his breast and kissed her; and his 
eyes grew hot with tears. 

" Beatrice!" 

Her arms were round his neck, and their lips clung. 

" Hurl ? Are you hurt ? " he cried. " Tell me  how  " 

"Allan! The monster  is he dead?" she shivered, sitting up and staring wildly round at the cave walls on 
which the fresh-built fire was beginning to throw dancing 
lights. 

" Dead, yes. But bush, Beta ! Don't think of that now. 
Everything's all right  you're safe! I'm here!" 

" Those men  " 

' Two of our own Folk. I brought them back with me  
just in time, darling. Without them  " 

He broke short off. Not for worlds would he have told 
her how near the borderland she had been. 

" You heard my shouts? You heard our signal? " 

" Ob  I don't know Allan. I can't think, yet  it's all so 
terrible  so confused  " 

" There, there, sweetheart ; don't think about it any more. 
Just lie down and rest. Go to sleep. I'll watch here beside 
you. You're safe. Notliing can hurt you nowl" 




538 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

She lay back with a sigh, and for a while kept silence 
while he sat beside her, his uninjured arm beneath her 
head. 

His one ambition, now that he found she was not seriously hurt in body, was to keep her from talking of the 
horrible affair  from exciting herself and rehearsing her 
terrors. Above all, she must be quieted and kept calm. 

At last, in her own natural voice, she spoke again, 

" Allan ? " 

" What is it, sweetheart?" 

" I owe you my life once more! If I was yours before 
I'm ten times more yours now ! " 

He bent and kissed her, and presently her deepened 
breathing told him she had drifted over the borderline into 
the sleep of exhaustion. 

He blessed her strength and courage. 

" No futility here," thought he. " No useless questions 
or hysterics; no scene. Strong! Gad, but she's strong! 
She realized she was safe and I was with her again; that 
sufficed. Was there ever another woman like her since the 
world began ? " 

Only now that the girl slept did he pay attention to 
the two Merucaans who, sitting by the cave door, were regarding him with troubled looks. 

" Master ! " said Zangamon, arising and coming toward 
him. 

" Well, what is it now ? " 

" You are wounded, O Kromno! Your arm still bleeds. 
Let us bind it." 

" It is nothing  only a scratch ! " 

But Zangamon insisted. 

" Master/' said he, " in this we cannot obey you. Sec! 
While you and the woman talked I fetched water, as you 
commanded. Now T must wash your hurts and bind them." 

Allan had to accede. Together the two Merucaans examined the injuries with words of commiseration. The 
" scratch " turned out to be three severe lacerations of the 



A RESPITE FROM TOIL 539 

forearm. The gorilla's teeth had missed the radial artery 
only by a fluke of fortune. 

They bathed away the clotted blood and bandaged the 
arm not unskilfully. Allan pressed the hand of Zangamon, then that of his companion. 

" No thanks of mine can tell you what I feel! " he exclaimed straight from the heart. " Only for you to g;uide 
me, to drive the man-brute, to strike it down when it was 
just about to throttle me  only for you, both she and /  " 

He could not finish. The words choked him. He felt, 
as never before, a sudden, warm, human touch of kinship 
with the Merucaans a strong, nascent affection. Till now 
they had been savages to him  inferiors. 

Now he perceived their inner worth  the strong and 
manly stamina of soul and body; and through him thrilled 
a love for these strange men, his saviors and the girl's. 

Once more he seemed to see a vision of the future  
a world peopled by the descendants of this hardy and resourceful folk, " without disease of flesh or brain, shapely 
and fair, the married harmony of form and function "  
and, as with a gesture, he dismissed them wondering, not 
understanding in the least why he should thank them, he 
knew the world already had begim once more lo come back 
under the hand, under the strong control of man. 

" Sleep now, master," Bremilu entreated. " We who arc 
new to this strange world will sit outside the door upon the 
rock and watch those fires so far above that you call stars. 
And the big sun-fire that is coming, too  we would see 
that 1 " 

" No, not yet ! " Stem commanded. " You cannot bear 
it for a while. Stay within and roll the rock against the 
door and sleep. The great fire might injure you or even 
kill you, as il did the  " 

He checked himself just in time, for " the patriarch " had 
all but escaped him. Zangamon, with sudden understandrng, once more advanced toward him a5.iie sat there by the 
girl. 



i 




540 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" O master ! You mean the ancient man ? He is dead ? " 

Stem nodded. 

" Yes," he answered. " He was so old and weak, the 
touch of the fire in the sky  he could not bear it But his 
death was happy, for at least he felt its warmth vpon his 
brow ! " 

The Merucaans kept silence for a moment, then Stem 
heard them murmuring together, and a vague uneasiness 
crept over him. 

He strove, however, to put it away; though in his heart 
the shame of the lie he had been forced to tell would not 
be quieted. 

The colonists, however, made no further speech, but 
presently rolled the rock in front of the cave entrance, 
then wrapped themselves in their long cloaks and lay down 
by the fire. 

Soon, like the healthy savages they were, they were 
fast asleep, with vigorous snorings. 

Thus the night passed, while Stem kept watch over the 
girl; and another day crept slowly up the sky, and in the 
cave now rested four human beings  the vanguard of the 
coming nation. 



CHAPTER XVII 

THE DISTANT MENACE 

Stern never knew when he, too, drifted off to sleep; but 
lie awoke to find Zangamon silting beside him, with his 
cloak drawn over his head, while Beatrice and Bremilu still 
slept. 

" The light, master  it is like knives to me I Like spears 
to my eyes, master ! I cannot bear it ! " whispered the 
Merucaan, pointing to where, around the interstices of the 
doorway, bright white gleams were streaming in. 

Allan considered with perplexity. 

" It hurts, you say?" 

" Yes, Kronino ! Once or twice I have tried to watch 
that strange fire, but I cannot. The pain is very great ! " 

"Humph!" thought Allan. "This may be a more serious factor than I've reckoned on. These people arc 
albinos. White hair and pink eyes  not a particle of protecting pigmentation. For thirty or so generations they've 
been subjected to nothing but torchlight. The actinic 
rays of the sun are infinitely more penetrating than anything they've ever known. It may take months, years even, 
to accustom them to sunlight ! " 

And disquieting situations presented themselves to his 
mind. True, if it were necessary, the Folk could work and 
take the air only at night. 

They could fish, hunt and till the soil by star and moonlight, and sleep by day ; but this was by no means the veritable reestablishment of a real, human civilization. 

Then an idea struck him. 



/ 




s 



542 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" The very thing ! " cried he. " Once I can put it into 
effect, it will solve the question. And the second generation, at the outside, will be normal. They'll  throw back ' 
to remote ancestry under changed conditions. In time, even 
if only a long time, all will yet be well ! ' 

But now immediate labors and difficult problems were 
pressing. The future would have to look out for itself. 

Stern felt positive that to let the Merucaans out of the 
cave would not only blind them, but might also kill them 
outright as well. 

Their unprotected skins would inevitably bum to a blister 
under the rays of the sun, and they would in all probability die. So said he: 

"Listen, Zangamon! You must stay here till the daric 
conies again, which will not be very long. The woman 
and I will prepare another cave for your dwelling. When 
it is dark you can fish in the flowing water beneath. In 
the mean time we will bring you your accustomed food and 
your nets from the flying boat. 

" You must be patient. In a short time all thmgs shall be 
as you wish, and you shall see the wonderful and beautiful 
world up into which I have brought you I " 

The man nodded, yet Stem clearly saw his face betrayed 
uneasiness, distrust and pain. In all fairness, the Merucaans' first experience of the upper world had been enough 
to shake the faith even of a philosopher  how much more 
so that of simple and untaught barbarians ! 

Terror, violence, slaughter and insecurity  these all had 
greeted the colonists ; and now, in addition, they found the 
patriarch was dead. Above all, they were virtually prisoners in this gloomy cavern of the rock. 

But Stern was very wise. He by no means thought of 
commiserating or excusing. His only course was to make 
light of trials and hardships, and, if need were, to command. 

He arose, carefully stopped up the chinks around the 
rock at the doorway, and bade Zangamon replenish the fire 



THE DISTANT MENACE 543 

with dry sticks. Then, BremiKi awakening, ihey prepared 
food. 

Now Beatrice, too, awoke. Allan took her in his amis, 
unmindful of ihe newcomers, and there were words of love 
and joy, and self-reproaches, and a new faith plighted between them once again. 

She was unJiarmed, except for a few bruises and scratches. 
Her nerves had already recovered something of their usual 
strength. But at sight of Allan's bandaged arm she turned 
pale, and not even his assurances could comfort her. 

They talked of the terrible adventure. 

" It was all my fault, Allan  every bit my fault ! " she 
exclaimed remorsefully, " It all came from my not obeying 
orders. You see, I was expecting you last night. Instead 
of slaying in the cave, with the door barricaded. I lingered 
on the terrace, after having piled the signal-fire high with 
wood, 

" I sat down and watched the sky, and listened to the 
river down below, and thought of you. I must have dozed 
a little, for all of a sudden I came wide-awake, shuddering 
with a terror I couldn't understand. Then I heard something moving down the path  something that grunted and 
snuffled savagely, 

" I started up, ran for the cave, and just got inside when 
the brute reached it, I rolled the stone in place, Allan, but 
before I could brace it with the pole it was hurled back, 
and in crawled the gorilla, roaring and snapping like a 
demon ! " 

She hid her face in both hands, shuddering at the terrible 
memory. But, forcing herself to be calm, she went on 
again : 

" I snatched up the pistol and fired. Then  " 

" You hit him? " 

" I must have, for he screeched most horribly and pawed 
at his breast  " 

" So, then, that explains the blood-marks on the floor 
and the great hand-print on the wall ? " 




544 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" Hand-print? Was there one? " 

" Yes ; but no matter now. Go on ! ' 

" After that  oh, it was too ghastly ! He seized mc and I 
fought  I struggled against that huge, hairy chest; he 
gripped me like iron. My blows were no more than so 
many pats to him. 

" I tried to fire again, but he wrenched the pistol away, 
and bent it in his huge teeth and flung it down. But, though 
he was raging, he didn't wound me  didn't try to kill me 
or anything. He seemed to want to capture me alive   

Allan shuddered. Only too well he understood. Gorilla 
nature had not changed in fifteen hundred years. 

" After that ? " he questioned eagerly. 

" Oh, after that I don't remember much. I must have 
fainted. Next thing I knew, ever3rthing was dark and the 
forest was all about. I screamed and then again I knew 
nothing. Once more I seemed to sense things, and once 
more all grew black. And after that  " 

"Well?" 

" Why  I was here on the bed, and you were beside me, 
Allan  and these men of our Folk were here! But how 
it all happened, God knows I " 

" ril tell you some time. You shall have the story from 
our side some day, but not now. Only one thing  if it 
hadn't been for Zangamon here and Bremilu  well- " 

" You mean they helped rescue me?" 

He nodded. 

" Without them Td have been helpless as a child. They 
traced you in the dark, for they could see as plainly as 
we see by day. It was a blow from Bremilu's stone ax that 
killed the brute. They saved you, Beatrice I Not II ' 

She kept a little silence, then said thoughtfully: 

' How can I ever thank them, Allan ? How can I thank 
them best?" 

" You can't thank them. There's no way. I tried it, but 
they didn't understand. They only did what seemed natural 
to them. They're savages, remember; not civilized men. 



THE DISTANT MENACE 545 

It's impossible to thank thein ! The only thing you can do, 
or I can do, is work for thein now. The greatest efforts 
and sacrifices for these men wiH be small payment for 
their deed. And if  as I believe  the whole race is dowered with the same spirit and indomitable courage  tlie 
courage we certainly did sec in the Battle of the Wall  then 
we need have no fear of our transplaiiled nation dying out ! " 

Much more there might have been to say, but now the 
meal was ready, and hunger spoke in no uncertain tones. 
All four of the adventurers ate in silence, thoughtful and 
grave, cross-legged, about the meat and drink, which lay 
on palm-leaves or in clay bowls hard-burned and red. 

A kind of embarrassment seemed to rest on all, for this 
was the first time they had eaten together  these barbarians 
with the two folk of the upper world. 

But the meal was soon at an end, and the prospect o 
labors to be undertaken cheered Allan's spirit. Despite his 
stiff and painful arm, he felt courage and energy throbbing 
in his veins, and longed to be at work. 

" The very first thing we must do," said he, " is fix up 
a place for our guests. They've got to stay here, out of the 
light, till nightfaU, That will give us plenty of time. I 
want to get them settled in their own quarters, and bring 
them into some regular routine of life and labor, before 
they have a chance to get homesick and dejected." 

He warned ihe Merucaans to cover their heads with their 
cloaks while Beatrice and he opened the doonvay. 

He closed it then, with other rocks outside, and covered 
it with his own outer cloak; then, wearing only his be!te<i 
tunic, he rejoined Beatrice half-way up the path to the clifftop. Both were armed ; he with his own automatic, she with 
the one they had found in the crypt. 

"Our first move," said he, "will be to transport the 
various things from the aeroplane. It will be something of 
a task, but I don't dare leave them out there on the barrens 
till night, when the men themselves could bring them in. 
The sooner we get things to rights the better." 




546 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

She agreed, and together they took the path toward the 
landing-place, which they had christened Newport Heights 
Stern felt grateful that his right arm, his gun arm, was 
uninjured. The other mattered little for the present. 

An idea crossed his mind to seek out the dead gorilla 
and make a trophy of the pelt ; but he dismissed it at (Mice. 
The beast was so repellant that the very thought of it fair 
sickened him. 

They reached the plane in some few minutes found 
everything uninjured, and loaded themselves with theMeni 
caans' goods and chattels. Stern took the bags of edible 
seaweed and the metal crate of fowl; she draped the big 
net over her shoulders, and together, not without difficulty, 
they returned to Settlement Cliffs. 

Pass, now, all the minute details of the installaticMi. By 
noon they had prepared a habitation for the newcomers, 
deep in a far recess of a winding gallery which thoroughly 
excluded all direct sunlight. 

Only the dimmest glow penetrated even at high nooa 
Here they stowed the freight, built a rock fireplace, and 
threw down quantities of the long, fragrant grass for bedding. 

They returned to their own cave, bade the colonists once 
more cover their heads, and entered, carefully closing the 
doorway after them. All four dined together, in true Merucaan style, on the familiar food of the Abyss. The colonists 
seemed a little more reassured, but talk languished none 
the less. 

The afternoon was spent in preparing a second cave; 
for, in spite of all the girl's entreaties, Allan was determined to make another visit to the village of the Lost Fdk 
as soon as his arm should permit. 

" Nothing can happen this time, dear girl," he assured 
her as they sat resting by the mouth of the newly prepared 
dwelling. " You'll have two absolutely faithful and efficient 
guards always within call by night. By day you can barricade yourself with them, if there's any sign of danger." 



THE DISTANT MENACE 547 

" I know, AUan, but  " 

"There's no other way! Our work is just begun!" 

She nodded silently, tlien said in a low tone ; 

" Yours the labor ; mine the waiting, the watching, and 
the fear ! " 

"The fear? Since when have you grown timid?" 

"Only for you, Allan! Only for you! Suppose, some 
time, you should not come back ! " 

He laughed. 

" We thrashed that all out the first time. It's old straw. 
Beta. My end of the task is getting these people here. 
Yours is waiting, watching  and being strong!" 

Her hand tightened on his, and for a little while they 
sat quite still and without speech, watching the day draw 
to its close. 

Far below, New Hope River chattered its incessant gossip 
to the ve-xiiig boulders. Above, in the sky, lazy June clouds, 
wool-white, drifted to westward, as though seeking the 
glory that there promised to transmute them into gold and 
crimson. 

A pleasant wind swayed the forest, wherein the scarlet 
birds flitted like flashes of flame. The beauty of the outlook 
thrilled their hearts, leaving no room for words. 

But suddenly Allan's eyes narrowed, and with a singuSar 
hardening of expression, a tightening of the jaw, he peered 
away at the dim, haze-shrouded line of far horizon to northeastward. 

He cast a sidelong glance at Beatrice. She had noticed 
nothing. 

One moment he made as though to speak, then repressed 
the words, and once more gazed at the horizon. 

There, so vague as almost to leave a doubt in mind, j-et. 
after all, only too terribly real, his keen sight had detected 
something which caused his heart to throb the quicker and 
his eye to gleam with hate. 

For, at the very nm of the world, dim, pale, ominous, 
three tiny threads of smoke were hanging in the evening air. 




CHAPTER XVIII 

THE ANNUNCIATION 

A WEEK later all was ready for Allan's second trip into the 
Abyss. 

His ami had recovered its usual strength and suppleness, 
for his flesh, healthy as any savage's, now had the power 
of healing with a rapidity unknown to civilized men in the 
old days. 

And his abounding vigor dictated action  always action, 
progress, and accomplishment. Only one thing depressed 
him  idleness. 

It was on the second day of July, according to the rude 
calendar they were keeping, that he once more bade farewell to Beatrice and, borne by the Pauillac, headed for the 
village of the Lost Folk. 

He left behind him all matters in a state of much improvement. Zangamon and Bremilu were now well installed in 
the new environment and seemingly content. By night 
ihcy fished in New Hope Pool, making hauls such as their 
steaming sea had never yielded. 

They wandered  not too far, however  in the forest, 
gradually making the acquaintance of the wondrous upper 
world, and with their strangely acute instincts finding fruits, 
bulbs and plants that well agreed with them for food. 

Allan had carefully instructed them in the use of the 
wonderful " fire-bow "  the revolver  warning them, however, not to waste ammunition. They learned quickly, and 
now Beatrice found her larder supplied each night with 
game, which they dressed and brought her in the evening 
gloom, eager to serve their mistress in all possible ways. 

548 



THE ANNUNCIATION 549 

They fished for her as well, and all the choicest fruits 
were her portion. She, in turn, cooked for them in their 
own cave. And for an hour or two each night she instructed 
them in English. 

Short are the annals of peace  and peace reigned at Settlement Ciiffs those few days at least. Prtess! 

She could feel it, see it, every hour. And her thoughts 
of Allan, now abandoning their melancholy hue, began to 
thrill with a new and even greater pride. 

"Only he, only he could have brought these things to 
pass!" she murmured sometimes. "Only he could have 
planned all this, dreamed this dream, and brought it to 
reality ; only he could labor for the future so strongly and 
so Weill" 

And in her heart the love that had been that of 3 girl 
became that of a woman. It broadened, deepened and grew 
calmer. 

Its fever cooled into a finer, purer glow. It strengthened 
day by day, transmuting to a perfect trust and confidence 
and peace. 

Allan returned safely inside the week with two more of 
the Folk  warriors and fishers both. Beatrice would have ' 
welcomed the arrival of even one woman to bear her some 
kind of company, but she realiz'ed the wisdom of his plan. 

" The main thing at first," he explained, as they sat again 
on the terrace the evening of his return, "the very most 
essential thing is to build up even a small force of fighting 
men to hold the colony and protect it  a stalwart advanceguard, as if this were a military expedition. After that the 
women and children can come. But for the present there's 
no place for them." 

Now that there were four Merucaans, all seemed more 
contented. The little group settled down into some real 
semblance of a community. 

Work became systematized. Life was beginning to take 
firm root in the world again, and already the outlines of 
the future colony were commencing to be sketched in. 



/ 




550 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

So far as Stern could discover, no disaffection as yet 
existed. The Folk, in any event, were singularly stolid, here 
as in their own home. If the colonists sometimes muttered 
together against conditions or concerning the lie Allan bad 
told about the patriarch, he could never discover the fact 

He derived a singular sense of power and exaltation from 
watching his settlers at their work. 

Strange figures they made in the upper world, descending the cliff at night, their torches flaring on their purewhite hair bound with gold ornaments, their nets slung over 
their brown-clad shoulders. 

Strange, too, were the sensations of Beta and Allan as 
they beheld the flambeaux gleaming silently along the pod 
or over the surface when the Folk put forth on the rude 
rafts Allan had helped them build. 

And as, with the same weird song they had used in the 
under world, the heavy-laden Merucaans clambered again 
up the terraces to their dwelling in the rock, smnething drew 
very powerfully at Allan's heart. 

He analyzed it not, being a man of deeds rather than of 
introspection ; yet it was '' the strong man yeamii toward 
his kind," the very love of his own race within him  the 
thrill, the inspiration of the master builder laying the foundations for better things to be. 

Allan and the girl had long talks about the character of 
the future civilization they meant to raise. 

" We must begin right this time at all hazards/' he told 
her. " The world we used to know just happened; it just 
grew up, hit-or-miss, without scientific planning or thoig 
or care. It was partly the result of chance, partly of ignoi 
ance and greed. The kind of human nature it developed was 
in essence a beast nature, with ' Grab ! ' for its creed. 

" We must do better than that ! From the very staft 
now, we must nip off the evil bud that might later blossoa 
into private property and wealth, exploitation and miseiy. 
There shall be no rich men in our world now and no slaves. 



THE ANNUNCIATION 551 

No idlers and no oppressed, ' Service ' must be our watchword, and our motto ' Each for all and all for each 1 ' 

" While there are fish within the river and fruit upon 
the palm, none shall starve and none shall hoard. Superstition and dogma, fear and cruelty, shall have no place with 
us. We understand  you and 1; and what we know we 
shall teach. And nothing shall survive of the world that 
was, save such things as were good. For the old order 
has passed away  and the new day shall be a better one." 

Thus for hours at a time, by starlight and moonlight on 
the rock-terrace or by fire-glow in their cave  now homelike with rough-hewn furniture and mats of plaited grass  
they talked and dreamed and planned. 

And executed, too; for they drew up a few basic, simple laws, and these they taught their little colony even 
now, for from the very beginning they meant the germs 
of the new society should root in the hearts of the rescued 
race. 

The third trip was delayed by a tremendous rain that 
poured with tropic suddenness and fury over the face of 1 

the world, driven on the breath of a wild-shouting tempest 

For the space of two days heaven and earth were blotted 
out by the gray, hurling sheets of wind-driven water, while 
down the caiion New Hope River roared and foamed in 
thunder cadences. 

Beta and Allan, warmly and snugly sheltered in their 
cave, cared nothing for the storm. It only served to remind 
them of that other torrential downpour, soon after they 
had reached the village of the Folk; but now how altered 
the situation! Captives then, they were masters now; and 
the dread chasms of the Abyss were now exchanged for the 
beauties and the freedom of the upper world. 

No wind could shake, no deluge invade, their house 
among the everlasting rock-ribs. Bright crackled their fire, 
and on the broad divan of cedar he had hewn and covered 
thick with furs, they two could lie and talk and dream, and 
let the storm rage, careless of its impotent fury. 

b / 




552 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" There's only one sorrow in my heart," whispered Beta, 
drawing his head down on her breast and smoathing his 
hair with that familiar, well-loved caress. " Just one, dear 
 can you guess it ? " 

" No millinery shops to visit, you mean?" he rallied her. 

 Oh, Allan, when Im so much in earnest, how can you ? " 

" Well, what's the trouble, sweetheart ? " 

" When the storm ends you're going to leave me again ! 
I wish  I almost wish it would rain forever!" 

tic made no answer, and she, as one who sees strange and 
sad visions, gazed into the leaping flames, and in her deep 
gray eyes lay tears unshed. 

" Sing to me ! " he murmured presently. 

Stroking his head and brow, she sang  as aforetime at 
the bungalow upon the Hudson: 

Stark ivic dcr Pels, 

Tief wie das Mecr, 

Muss deine Liehe, 

Muss dcine Licbe scin! . y  

The third trip was made in safety, and others after it, 
and steadily tlie colony took shape and growth. 

More and more the caves came to be occupied. Stem set 
tlic Mcrucaans to work excavating the limestone, piercing 
tunnels and chimneys, making passageways and preparing 
for the ever-increasing number of settlers. 

Their native arts and crafts began to flourish. In the 
jloomy recesses fires glowed hot. Ores began to be smelted, 
with primitive bellows and technique as in the Under-world, 
and through the night-stillness sounded the ring and clangor 
of anvils mightily smitten. 

Palm-fibers yielded cordage for more nets or finer thread 
for the looms that now began to clack  for at last some 
few women had arrived, and even a couple of the strong, 
pale children, who had traveled stowed in crates like the 
water-fowl. 



THE ANNUNCIATION 553 

By night the pool and river gleamed more and more 
brightly. Boats navigated even the rapids, for these were 
hardy waler-peopte, whose whole life had been semi-aquatic. 

The strange fowl nested in the diff below ihe settlement, 
hiding by day, flying abroad by night, swimming and diving 
in the river, even rearing their broods of squawking, naked 
little monsters in rough nests of twigs and mud. 

Some of the hardier of the first-arrived colonists had 
already  far sooner than Allan had hoped  begun to tolerate a little daylight. 

Following his original idea, he prepared some sets of 
brown mica eye-shields, and by the aid of these a number 
of the Merucaans were able to endure an hour or two of 
early dawn and late evening in the open air. 

The children, he found, were far less sensitive to light 
than the adults  a natural sequence of the atavistic principle well known to all biologists. 

He hoped that in a year or so many of the Folk might 
even bear the noon-day sun. Once he coutd get them to 
working with him by daylight his progress would leap forward mightily in many lines of activity that he had planned. 

An occasional short raid with the Pauillac had stocked the 
colony with firearms, chemicals and necessary drugs, cutlery, ammunition and some glassware, from the dismantled 
cities of Nashville, Cincinnati, Indianapolis and other places 
unidentified. 

Allan foresaw almost infinite possibilities in these raids. 
Civilization he felt, would surge onward with amazing rapidity fostered by this detritus of the distant past. 

He also unearthed and brought back to Settlement Oiflfs 
the phonographs and records, sealed in their oiled canvas 
and hidden in the rock-cleft near the patriarch's grave. 

Thereafter of an evening the voices of other days sang 
in the cave. Around the entrance, now protected by stout 
and ample timber doors, gathered an eager, wondering, fascinated group, understanding the universal appeal of harmony, softened and humanized by the music of the world 




554 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

that was. And thus, too, was the education of the Folk 
making giant strides. 

Progress, tremendous progress, toward the goal 1 

Autumn came down the world, and the sun paled a little 
as it sank to southward in the heavens. Warmth and luxuriant fertility, fecundity without parallel, still pervaded 
the earth, but a certain change had even so become well 
marked. Slowly the year was dying, that another might 
be bom. 

It was of a glorious purple evening late in October that 
Allan made the great discovery. 

He had come in from working with two or three of the 
hardier Folk on the temporary hangar he was building for 
the Pauillac on Newport Heights, to which a broad and 
well-graded roadway now extended through the jungle. 

Entering the home-cave suddenly  and it was home now 
indeed, with its broad stone fireplace, its comfortable furnishings, its furs, its mats of clean, sweet-smelling rusheshe stopped, toil-worn and weary, to view the well-loved 
place. 

' Well, little wife ! Busy, as usual ? Always busy, sweetheart ? " 

At his greeting Beatrice looked up as though startled 
She was sitting in a low easy-chair he had made for her of 
split bamboos cleverly lashed and softly cushioned. 

At her left hand, on the palm-wood table, stood a heavy 
bronze lamp from some forgotten millionaire's palace in 
Atlanta. Its soft radiance illumined her face in profile, 
making a wondrous aureole of her clustered hair, as in 
old paintings of the Madonna at the Annunciation. 

A presage gripped the man's heart, drawing powerfully 
at its strings with pain, yet with delicious hope and joy as 
she turned toward him. 

For something in her face, some new, beatified, maternal 
loveliness, not to be analyzed or understood, betrayed her 
wondrous secret. ' 



THE ANNUNCIATION 



S5S 



With a little gasp, she dropped into her lap the liit of 
needlework and sought lo hide it with her hands  a gesture 
wholly girlish yet  to hide and guard it with those hands, 
so useful and beautiful, so precious and so dearly loved. 

But Allan, breathing hard and deep, strode to her, his 
face aflame with hope and adoration. He caught them up 
together in the gentle strength of his rough hands and 
pressed them to bis heart. 

Beside her he knctt silently; he encircled her with his right 
arm. Then he took up the tiny garment, smiling. 

For a long minute their eyes met. 

His brimmed with sudden tears. Hers fell, and her head 
. drooped down upon his breast, and  as once before, at the 
cathedral  an eloquent tide of crimson mounted from breast 
to throat, from cheek to tendrilled hair. 

About his neck her arms slid, trembled, tightened. 

No word was uttered there under the golden lamp-glow; 
but the strong kiss he pressed, reverently, proudly, upon 
her brow, renewed with ten-time depth their eternal sacrament of love. 



J 




CHAPTER XIX 

THE MASTER OF HIS RACE 

Days, busy days, lengthened into weeks, and these to months 
happy and full of labor; and in the ever-growing colony 
progress and change came steadily forward. 

All along the cliff-face and the terraces the cave-dwellings 
now extended, and the smoke from a score of chimneys 
fashioned among the clefts rose on the temperate air of that 
sub-tropic winter. 

At the doors, nets hung drying. On the pool, boats crc 
anchored at several well-built stone wharfs. The terraces 
had been walled with palisades on their outer edge and 
smooth roadways fashioned, leading to all the dwellings 
as well as to the river below. 

On top of the cliff and about three hundred yards back 
from the edge another palisade had been built of stout timl)ers set firmly in the earth, interlaced with cordage and 
propped with strong braces. 

The enclosed space, bounded to east and west by the barrier which swung toward and touched the canon, had all 
been cleared, save for a few palms and fern-trees left for 
shade. 

Beside drying-frames for fish and game and a wellsmoothed plaza for public assemblies and the giving of the 
Law, it now contained Stern's permanent hangar. The 
Pauillac had been brought along the road from Newport 
Heights and housed there. 

This road passed through strong gates of hewn planks 
hinged with well-wrought ironwork forged by some of the 



THE MASTER OF HIS RACE S57 

Folk under the direction of H'yemba, the smith. For 
H'yemba, be it known, had been brought up by Stern early 
in December. 

The man was essential to progress, for none knew so 
well as he the arts of smelting and of metal-work. Stern 
still felt suspicious of him, but by no word or act did the 
smith now betray any rebellious spirit, any animosity, or 
aught but faithful service. 

Allan, however, could not trust him yet. No telling what 
fires might still be smoldering under the peaceful and industrious exterior. And the master's eye often rested keenly 
on the powerful figure of the blacksmith. 

Across the canon, from a point about fifty yards to eastward of Cliff Villa  as Beta and Allan had christened their 
home  a light bridge had been flung, connecting the northern with the southern bank and saving laborious toil in 
crossing via tlie river-bed. 

This bridge, of simple construction, was merely temporary. Allan counted on eventually putting up a first-class 
cantilever; but for now he was content with two stout fiber 
cables anchored to palm-trunks, floored with rough boards 
lashed in place with cordage, and railed with strong rope. 

This bridge opened up a whole new tract of country to 
northward and vastly widened the fruit and game supply. 
Plenty reigned at Settlement Cliffs; and a prosperity such 
as the Folk had never known in the Abyss, a well-being, a 
luxurious variety of foodstuffs  fruits, meats, wild vegetables  as well as a profusion of furs for clothing, banished discontent. 

Barring a little temporary depression and lassitude due 
to the great alteration of environment, the Folk experienced 
but slight ill effects from the change. 

And, once they grew acclimated, their health and vigor 
rapidly improved. Strangest of all, a phenomenon most 
marked in the children, Allan noticed that after a few 
weeks under the altered conditions of food and exposure to 
the actinic rays of the sun as reflected by the moonlight, 




SS8 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

pigmentation began to develop. A certain clouding of the 
iris began to show, premonitory of color-deposit. The skin 
lost something of its chalky hue, while at the roots of the 
hair, as it grew, a distinct infiltration of pigment-cells was 
visible. And at this sight Allan rejoiced exceedingly. 

Beatrice did not now go much abroad with him, on account 
of her condition. She hardly ventured farther than the 
top of the cliff, and many days she sat in her low chair 
on the terrace, resting, watching the river and the forest, 
thinking, dreaming, sewing for the little new colonist soon 
to arrive. Some of their most happy hours were spent thus, 
as Allan sat beside her in the sun, talking of their future. 
The bond between them had grown closer and more intimate. 
They two, linked by another still unseen, were one. 

" Will you be very angry with me, dear, if it's a girl?" 
she asked one day, smiling a little wistfully. 

"Angry? Have I ever been angry with you, darling? 
Could I ever be? " 

She shook her head. 

" No ; but you might if I disappointed you now." 

"Impossible! Of course, the world's work demands a 
chief, a head, a leader, to come after me and take up the 
reins when they fall from my hands, but  " 

" Even if it's a girl  only a girl  you'll love mc just the 
same ? " 

His answer was a pressure of her hand, which he brought 
to his lips and held there a long minute. She smiled again, 
and in the following silence their souls spoke together 
though their lips were mute. 

But Beta had her work to do those days as well as Allan. 

While he planned the public works of the colony and 
directed their construction at night, or made his routine 
weekly trip into the Abyss for more and ever more of the 
Folk  a greatly shortened trip, now that he knew the way 
so well and needed stop below ground only long enough to 
rest a bit and take on oil and fuel  she was busy with 
her teaching of the people. 



THE MASTER OF HIS RACE 559 

They had carefully discussed this matter, and had decided 
to impose English bodily and arbitrarily upon the colonists. 
Every evening Beatrice gathered a class of the younger 
men and women, always including the children, and for an 
hour or two drilled them in simple words and sentences. 

She used their familiar occupations, and taught them to 
speak of fishing, metal- working, weaving, dyeing, and the 
preparation of food. 

And always after they had learned a certain thing, in 
speaking to them she used English for that thing. The Folk, 
keen-witted and retentive of memory aS barbarians often 
are, made astonishing strides in this new language. 

They realized fully now that it was the speech of their 
remote and superior ancestors, and that it far surpassed 
their own crude and limited tongue. 

Thus they learned with enthusiasm; and before long, 
among them in their own daily lives and labors, you could 
hear words, phrases, and bits of song in English, And 
at sound of this both Allan and the girl thrilled with pride 
and joy, 

Allan felt confident of ultimate success along this line. 

" We must teach the children, above all," he said to her 
one day. " English must come to be a secondary tongue 
to them, familiar as Merucaan. The next generation will 
speak English from birth and gradually the other language 
will decay and perish  save as we record it for the sake of 
history. 

" It can't be otherwise, Beatrice. The superior tongue 
is always bound to replace the inferior. All flie science 
and technical work I teach these people must be explained 
in English, 

" They have no words for all these things. Bridges, 
flying-machines, engines, water-pipes for the new aqueduct 
we're putting in to supply the colony from the big spring 
up back there, tocAs, processes, everything of importance, 
will enforce English. The very trend of their whole evolu



S6o DARKNESS AND DAWN 

tion will drive them to it, even if they were unwilling, whicli 
they aren't" 

" Yes, of course," she answered. " Yet, after all, we're 
only two  " 

" We'll be three soon." 

She blushed. 

" Three, then, if you say so. So few among so manyit will be a hard fight, after all." 

'' I know, but we shall win. Old man Adams and one 
or two others, at the time of the mutiny of the  Bounty ' 
taught English to all their one or two score wives and 
numerous children on Pitcaim. 

" The Tahitan was soon forgotten, and the brown halfbreeds all spoke good English right up to the time of the 
catastrophe, when, of course, they were all wiped out. So 
you see, history proves the thing can be done  and will be." 

Came an evening toward the beginning of spring againan evening of surpassing loveliness, soft, warm, perfumed 
with the first crimson blossoms of the season  when Bremilu ran swiftly up the path to the cliff-top and sought Allan 
in the palisaded enclosure, working with his men on the 
new aqueduct. 

" Come, master, for they seek you now I " he panted. 

"Who?" 

" The mistress and old Gesafam, the aged woman, sldlled 
in all maladies! Come swiftly, O Kromno!" 

Allan started, dropped his lantern, and turned very white. 

" You mean  " 

" Yea, master ! Come ! " 

He found Beatrice in bed, the bronze lamp shining on 
her face, pale as his own. 

" Come, boy ! " she whispered. " Let me kiss you just 
once before  before  " 

He knelt, and on her brow his lips seemed to bum. She 
kissed him, then with a smile of happiness in all her pain 
said : 

" Go, dearest I You must go now ! " 



THE MASTER OF HIS RACE 561 

And, as he lingered, old Gesafam, chattering shrilly, seized 
him by the arm and pushed him toward the doorway. 

Dazed and in silence he submitted. But when the door 
had closed behind him, and he stood alone there in the 
moonlight above the rushing river, a sudden exahation 
thrilled him. 

He knelt again by the rough sill and kissed the doorway 
of the house of pain, the house of life; and his soul flamed 
into prayer to whatsoever Principle or Power wrought the 
mysteries of the ever-changing universe. 

And for hours, keeping all far away, he held his vigil; 
and the stars watciied above him, too, mysterious and far. 

But with the coming of the dawn, hark! a cry within! 
The cry  the thrilling, never-to-be-forgotten, heart-wringing cry of the first-bom ! 

" Oh, God! " breathed Allan, while down his checks hot 
tears gushed unrestrained. 

The door opened, Gesafam beckoned. 

Trembling, weak as a child, the man faltered in. Still 
burned the lamp upon the table. He saw the heavy masses 
of Beta's hair upon the pillow of deerskin, and something 
in his heart yearned toward her as never until now. 

" Allan ! " 

Choking, unable to formulate a word, shaking, he sank 
beside the bed, buried his face upon it, and wilh his hand 
sought hers, 

" Allan, behold your son! " 

Into his (juivering arms she laid a tiny bundle wrapped 
in the finest cloth the Folk could weave of soft palm-fibers. 

His sonl 

Against his face he held the child, sobbing. One hand 
sheltered it ; the other pressed the weak and trembling 
hand of Beatrice. 

And as the knowledge and the joy and pain of realisation, of full achievement, of fatherhood, surged through 
him, the strong man's tears baptized the future master of 
the race! 



/ 




CHAPTER XX 

DISASTER ! 

That evening, the evening of the same day, Allan presented 
the man-child to his assembled Folk. 

Eager, silent, awed, the white barbarians gathered on the 
terrace, all up and down the slope of it, before tlie door 
of their Kromno's house, waiting to behold the son of him 
they all obeyed, of him who was their law. 

Allan took the child and bore it to the doorway; and in 
the presence of all he held it up, and in the yellow moonlight dedicated it to their service and the service of the 
world. 

" Listen, O folk of the Merucaans ! " he cried.  I show 
you and I give you, now, into your keeping and protection 
forever, this first-born child of ours ! 

 This is the first American, the first of the ancient race 
that once was, the same race whence you, too, have descended, to be bom in the upper world ! His name shall be 
my name  Allan. To him shall be taught all good and 
useful things of body and of mind. He shall be your master, but more than master; he shall be your friend, your 
teacher, your strength, your guide in the days yet to come! 
To you his life is given. Not for himself shall he live, not 
for power or oppression, but for service in the good of all I 

"To you and your children is he given, to those who 
shall come after, to the new and better time. When we, 
his parents, and when you, too, shall all be gone from here, 
this man-child shall carry on the work with your descendants. His race shall be your race, his love and care 90 

562 



DISASTER! 563 

for your welfare, his every thought and labor for the comjiion good ! 

" Thus do I consecrate and give him to you, O my Folk! 
And from this hour of his naming I give you, too, a name. 
No longer shall you be Merucaans, but now Americans 
again. The ancient name shall live once more. He, an 
American, salutes you, Americans! You are his elder 
brothers, and between you the bond shall never loosen till 
the end. 

" I have spoken unto you. This is the Law 1 " 

In silence they received it, in silence made obeisance; 
and, as Allan once more carried the child back to its mother, 
silently they all departed to their' homes and labors. 

From that moment Allan believed his rule established now 
by stronger bonds of love than any force could be. And 
through all the intoxication of success and consummated 
power he felt a love for Beatrice, who had rendered all this 
possible, such as no human words could ever say. 

Allan, Junior, grew lustily, waxed strong, and filled the 
colony with joy. A new spirit pervaded Settlement ClifTs. 
The vital fact of new life born there, an augury of strength 
and increase and wo rid- dominance once more, cemented all 
the social bonds. 

An esprit de corps, an admirable and powerful cooperative sense developed, and the work of reconstruction, of 
learning, of progress went on more rapidly than ever! 

Beatrice, seated at the door of Cliff Villa with the child 
upon her knee, made a veritable heart and center for all 
thought and labor. She and Allan, Junior, became objects 
almost of worship for the simple Folk. 

It was heart -touching to see the eager interest, the love 
and veneration of the people, the hesitant yet fascinated way 
in which they contemplated this strange boy, blue-eyed and 
with yellow hair beginning to grow already; this, the first j 

child they had ever seen to show them what the children ' 

of their one-time ancestors had been. 




S64 DARKNESS AND DAWM 

The hunters, now growing very expert in the use of 
firearms, fairly overloaded the larder of the villa with rait 
game-birds and venison. The fishers outdid themselves 
to catch choice fish for their master's family. And eveiy 
morning fruits and flowers were piled at the doorway for 
their rulers' pleasure. 

Even then, when so much still remained to do, it seemed 
as though the Golden Age of Allan's dreams already was 
beginning to take form. These were by far the happiest 
days Beta and he had ever lived. Love, work, h(>es and 
plans filled their waking hours. 

Put far away were all discouragements and fears. All 
dangers seemed forever to have vanished. Even the portent of the signal-fires, from time to time seen on the northern or eastern horizons, were ignored. And for a while 
all was peace and joy. 

How little they foresaw the future; how little realized 
the terrible, the inevitable events now already closing down 
about them! 

Allan made no further trips into the Abyss for about two 
months and a half. Before bringing any more of the people to the surface, he preferred to put all things in readiness for their reception. 

He now had a working force of fifty-four men and twelve 
women. Including his own son, there were some seven 
children at Settlement Cliffs. The labor of civilizatioo 
wax%d apace. 

With large plans in view, he dammed the rapids and set 
up a small mill and power-plant, the precursor of a far 
larger one in the future. Various short flights to the ruins 
of neighboring towns put him in possession, bit by bit 
of machinery which he could adapt into needful forms. 

In a year or two he knew he would have to clear land 
and make preparations for agriculture. A grist-mill would 
soon be essential. He could not always depend upon die 
woods and streams for food for the colony. 

There must be cultivation of fruits and grains; the 



DISASTER! 565 

ing of wild fowl, cattle, horses, sheep and goats  but no 
swine ; and a regular evolution up through the stages again 
by which the society of the past had reached its climax. 

And to his ears the whirring of his turbine as the waters 
of New Hope River swirled through the penstocks, the 
spinning of the wheels, the slapping of the deerskin belting, 
made music only second to the voices of Beatrice and his 
son, 

Allan brought piecemeal and htted up a small dynamo 
from some extensive ruins to southeastward. He brought 
wiring and several still intact incandescent lights. Before 
long Cliff Villa shone resplendent, to the awe and marvel 
of the Folk. 

But Allan made no mystery of it. He explained it all 
to Zangamon, Bremilu and H'yemba, the smith; and when 
they seemed .to understand, bade them tell the rest. 

Thus every day some new improvement was installed, or 
some fresh knowledge spread among the colonists. 

June had drawn on again, and the hot weather had become 
oppressive, before Allan thought once more of still further 
trips into the Abyss. Beatrice tried to dissuade htm. Her 
heart shrank from further separation, risk and fear. 

" Listen, dearest," she entreated as they sat by young 
Allan's bedside, one sultry, breathless night. " I think 
you've risked enough ; really I do. You've got a boy now to 
keep you here, even if I can't I Please don't go! Follow 
out the plan you spoke to me about yesterday, but flon't 
go yourself! " 

"The plan?" 

"Yes, you know. Your idea of training three or four 
of the most intelligent men to fly, and perhaps building one 
or two more planes  that is, establishing a regular service 
to and from the Abyss. That would be so much wiser, 
Allan! Tliink how deadly imprudent it is for you, you 
personally, to take this risk every time! Why, if anything 
should happen  " 

"But it won't! It can't!" 



/ 




566 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

"  What would become of the colony ? We haven't got 
anything like enough of a start to go ahead with, ladang 
you! I speak now without sentiment orfoolish womaiily 
fears, but just on a common-sense, practical basis. Viewed 
at that angle, ought you to take the risk again? '' 

''Theres no time now, darling, to build more planes! 
No time to teach flying! We've got to recruit the coloiqr 
as fast as possible, in case of emergencies. Why, I haven't 
made a trip since  since God knows when! It's time I was 
off now ! " 

" Allan ! " 

'Well?" 

" Suppose you never went again? With the populatioa 
we now have, and the natural increase, wouldn't civilization reestablish itself in time ? " 

" Undoubtedly. But think how long it would take! 
Every additional person imported puts us ahead tremendously. I may never be able to bring all the Folk, all the 
I-anskaarn, and those other mysterious yellow-haired people they talk about from beyond the Great Vortex. But I 
can do my share, anyhow. Our boy here may have to complete the process. It may take a lifetime to accomplish the 
rescue, but it must be done ! " 

" So you're determined to go again?" 

" I am ! I must ! " 

She seized his hand imploringly. 

 And leave us? Leave your boy? Leave mef 

"Only to return soon, darling! Very soon!" 

' But after this one trip, will you promise to train somebody else to go in your place? " 

'' ril see, dearest ! " 

" No, no ! Not that ! Promise ! " 

She had drawn his head down, and now her face close to 
his, was trembling in her eagerness. 

" Promise ! Promise mc, Allan ! You must I " 

Suddenly moved by her entreaty, he yielded. 

 I promise. Beta ! " he exclaimed. " Gad, I didn't know 



DISASTER! 567 

you were so deadly afraid of my little expeditions! If I'd 
understood, I might have been arranging otherwise already. 
But I certainly will change matters when I get back. Only 
let me go once more, darling  that'll be the last time, I 
swear it to you ! " 

She gave a great sigh of relief unspeakable and kept 
silence. But in her eyes he saw the shine of sudden tears. 

Allan had been gone more than four days and a half 
before Beatrice allowed herself to realize or to acknowledge 
the sick terror that for some hours had been growing in 
her soul. 

His usual time of return had hitherto been just a little 
over three days. Sometimes, with favorable winds to the 
brink of the Abyss, and unusually strong rising currents of 
vapors from the sunken sea  from the Vortex, perhaps ?  
he had been able to make the round trip in sixty hours. 

But now over a hundred and eight hours had lagged by 
since Beatrice, carrying the boy, had accompanied him up 
ihe steep path to the hangar in the palisaded clearing. 

How light-hearted, confident, strong he had been, filled 
with great dreams and hopes and visions 1 No thought of 
peril, accident, or possible failure had clouded his mind. 

She recalled his farewell kiss given to the child and to herself, his careful inspection of the machine, his short and 
vigorous orders, and the supreme skill with which he had 
leaped aloft upon its back and gone whirring up the sky 
till distance far to the northwestward had swallowed him. 

And since that hour no sign of return. No speck against 
the blue. No welcome chatter of the engine far aloft, no 
hum of huge blades beating the summer airl Nothing! 

Nothing save ever-growing fear and anguish, vain hopes, 
fruitless peerings toward the dim horizon, agonizing expectations always frustrated, a vast and swiftly growing terror. 

Beatrice cringed from her own thoughts. She dared nol 
(ace the truth. 

For that way, she felt instinctively, lay madness. 




CHAPTER XXI 

ALLAN RETURNS NOT 

Five days dragged past, then six, then seven, and still no 
sign of Allan came to lighten the terrible and growiif 
anguish of the woman. 

All day long now she would watch for him  save at such 
times as the care and nursing of her child mercifully distracted her attention a little while from the intolerable grief 
and woe consuming her. 

She would stand for hours on the rock terrace, peeriqg 
into the northwest ; she would climb the steep path a dozen 
times a day, and in distraction pace the cliff-top inside the 
palisaded area, where now some few wild sheep and goats 
were penned in process of domestication. 

Here she would walk, calling in vain his name to the 
uncaring winds of heaven. With the telescope she would 
untiringly sweep the far reaches of the horizon, hoping, ever 
hoping, that at each moment a vague and distant speck 
might spring to view, wing its swift way southeastward, resolve itself into that one and only blessed sight her whole 
soul craved and burned for  the Pauillac and her husband! 

And so, till night fell, and her strained eyes could no 
longer distinguish anything but swimming mists and vapors 
she would watch, her every thought a prayer, her eveiy 
hope a torment  for each hope was destined only to end in 
disapiK)intmcnt bitterer far than death. 

And when the shrouding dark had robbed her of all possibility for further watching she would descend with slow 
and halting steps, grief-broken, dazed, half-maddened, to 

568 



ALLAN RETURNS NOT 569 

the home-cavem  empty now, in spite of her child's presence there  empty, and terrible, and drear ! 

Then would begin the long night vigil. Daylight gave 
some simulacrum of relief in action, some slight deadening 
of pain in the very searching of the sky, the strong, determined hope against what had now become an inner conviction of defeat and utter loss. But night  

Night 1 Nothii, then, but to sit and think, and think, 
and think, to madness! Sleep was impossible. At most, 
exhausted nature snatched only a few brief spells of semiconsciousness. 

Even the sight of the boy, lying there sunk in his deep 
and healthy slumber, only kindled fresh fires of woe. For 
he was Allan's child  he spoke to her by his mere presence 
of the absent, the lost, perhaps the dead man. 

And at thought that now she might be already widowed 
and her boy fatherless, she would pace the rock-floor in terrible, writhen crises of agony, hands clenched till the nails 
pierced the delicate flesh, eyes staring, face waxen, only for 
the sake of the child suppressing the sobs and heart-torn 
cries that sought to burst from her overburdened soul. 

" Oh, Allan ! Allan ! " she would entreat, as though he 
could know and hear. "Oh, come back to met What 
has happened ? Where are you ? Come back, come back to 
your boy  to me ! " 

Then, betimes, she would catch up the child and strain 
it to her breast, even though it awakened. Its cries would 
mingle with her anguished weeping; and in the firelit gloom 
of the cave they two she who knew, and he who knew not 
 would in some measure comfort one another. 

On the eighth day she sustained a terrible shock, a sudden joy followed by so poignant a despair that for a moment it seemed to her human nature could endure no more 
and she must die. 

For, eagerly watching the cloud-patched sky with the telescope, from the cliff-top  while on the terrace old Gesafani 




570 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

tended the child  she thought suddenly to behold a distant 
vision of the aeroplane ! 

A tiny spot in the heavens, truly, was moving across the 
field of vision! 

With a cry, a sudden flushing of her face, now so wan 
and colorless, she seemed to throw all her senses into one 
sense, the power of sight. And though her hand b;an to 
shake so terribly that she could only with a great cFort 
hold the glass, she steadied it against a fern-tree and thus 
managed to find agaia and hold the moving speck. 

The Pauillac! Was it indeed the Pauillac and Allan? 

" Merciful Heaven ! " she stammered. " Bring him bad 
to me ! " 

Again she watched, her whole soul aflame with hope and 
eagerness and tremulous joy, ready to burst into a blaxe 
of happiness  and then came disillusion and despair, 
blacker than ever and more terrible. 

For suddenly the moving speck turned, wheeled and rose. 
One second she caught sight of wings. She knew now it 
was only some huge, tropic bird, afar on die horiaon 
some condor, vulture, or other creature of the air. 

Then, as with a quick swoop, the vulture slid away and 
vanished behind a blue hill-shoulder, the woman drooled 
her glass, sank to earth, and  half-fainting  burst into a 
terrible, dry, sobbing plaint. Her tears, long since exhausted, would not flow. Grief could pass no further 
limits. 

After a time she grew calmer, arose and thought of her 
child once more. Slowly she returned down the via dolorosa of the terrace-path, the walk where she and Allan had 
so often and so gaily trodden; the path now so barren, so 
hateful, so solitary. 

To her little son she returned, and in her arms she cherished him  in her trembling arms  and the tears came at 

last, welcome and heart-stilling. 

Old Gesafam, gazing compassionately with troubled 



ALLAN RETURNS NOT 571 

that blinked behind their mica shields, laid a comforting 
hand on the girl's shoulder. 

"Do not weep, O Yulcia, mistress!" she exclaimed in 
her owa tongue. " Weep not, for there is still hope. See, 
all things are going on, as before, in the colony! " She gestured toward the lower caves, whence the sounds of smithywork and other toil drifted upward. " All is yet well with 
us. Only our Kromuo is away. And he will yet come! 
He will come back to us  to the child, to you, to all who 
love and obey him ! " . 

Beatrice seized the old woman's hand and kissed it in a 
burst of gratitude. 

" Oh  if I could only believe you ! " she sobbed. 

"It will be sot What could happen to him, so strong, 
so brave? He must come back! He will! " 

" What could hap]>en? A hundred things, Gcsafam! One 
tiny break in the flying boat and he might be hurled to earth 
or down the Abyss, to death ! Or, among your Folk, he may 
have been defeated for many of the Folk are sHU savage 
and very cruel! Or, the Horde  " 

"The Horde? But the Horde, of which you have so 
often spoken, is now afar." 

" No, Gcsafam. Even to-day I saw their signal-fires on 
the horizon." 

The old woman drew an arm about the girl. All barbarian that she was, the eternal, universal spirit of the 
feminine, pervading her, made her akin with the sorrowing 
wife. 

" Go rest," she whispered. " I understand. I, too have 
wept and mourned, though that was very long ago in the 
Abyss. My man, my Nausaak, a very brave and strong 
catcher of fish, fought with the Lanskaarn  and he died. 
I understand. Yulcia! You must think no more of this 
now. The child needs your strength. You must rest. 
Go!" 

Gently, yet with firmness that was not to be disputed, she 



t 



i 




572 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

forced Beatrice into the cave, made her lie down, and pit 
pared a drink for her. 

Though Beta knew it not, the wise old woman had steeped 
therein a few leaves of the ronyilu weed, brought from the 
Abyss, a powerful soporific. And presently a certain calm 
and peace began to win possession of her soul. 

For a time, however, distressing visions still continued to 
float before her disordered mind. Now she seemed to behold the Pauillac, flaming and shattered, whirling down, 
over and over, meteor-swift, into the purple mists and 
vapors of the Abyss. 

Now the scene changed; and she saw it, crushed and 
broken, lying on some far rock-ledge, amid impenetrable 
forests, while from beneath a formless tangle of wreckage 
protruded a hand  his hand  and a thin, dripping stream 
of red. 

Gasping, she sought to struggle up and stare about her; 
but the drugged draft was too potent, and she could not 
move. Yet still the visions came again  and now it seemed 
that Allan lay there, in the woods, somewhere afar, transfixed with an envenomed spear, while in a crowding, hideous, jabbering swarm the distorted, beast-like anthropoids 
jostled triumphantly all about him, hacked at him with 
flints and knives, flayed and dismembered him, inflicted 
unimaginable mutilations  

She knew no more. Thanks to the wondrous beneficence 
of the ronyilu, she slept a deep and dreamless slumber. 
Even the child being laid on her breast by the old woman 
 who smiled, though in her eyes stood tears  even this 
(lid not arouse her. 

She slept. And for a few blessed hours she had respite 
from woe and pain unspeakable. 

At last her dreams grew troubled. She seemed caught in 
a thunder-storm, an earthquake. She heard the smashing 
of the lightning bolts, the roaring shock of the reverberation, then the crash of shattered buildings. 



ALLAN RETURNS NOT 



573 



A sudden shock awoke her. She thought a falling block 
of stone had struck her arm. But it was only old Gesafam 
shaking her in terror, 

"Oh, Vulcia, noa!" the nurse was crying in terror. 
"Dpi Waken! The cliff falls! Awake, awake!" 

Beatrice sat up in bed. conscious through all the daze of 
dreams quick broken, that some calamity  some vast and 
unknown peril  had smitten the colony at Settlement CliSs. 



r 




CHAPTER XXII 

THE TREASON OF U'yEMBA 

Not yet even fully awake, Beatrice was conscious of a sudden, vast responsibility laid on her shoulders. She felt the 
thrill of leadership and command, for in her hands akme 
now rested the fate of the community. 

Out of bed she sprang, her grief for the moment crushed 
aside, aquiver now with the spirit of defense against all ills 
that might menace the colony and her child. 

" The cliff falls? " she cried, starting for the doorway. 

" Yea, mistress ! Hark ! " 

Both women heard a grating, crushing sound. The whole 
fabric of the cavern trembled again, as though shuddering; 
then, far below, a grinding crash reechoed  and now rose 
shouts, cries, wails of pain. 

Already Beatrice was out of (he door and running down 
the terrace. 

'Yulcia! Yulcia!" the old woman stood screaming 
after her. "You must not go!" 

She answered nothing, but ran the faster. Already she 
could see dust rising from the river-brink; and louder now 
the cries blended in an anguished chorus as she sped down 
the terrace. 

What could have happened? How great was the catastrophe? What might the death-roll be? 

Her terrors about Allan had at last been thrown into the 
background of her mind. She forgot the boy, herself. 
everything save the crushing fact of some stupendous 
calamity. 

574 



THE TREASON OF H'YEMBA 575 

All at once she stopped with a gasp of terror. 

She had reached the turn in the path whence now all the 
further reach of the cliff was visible. But, where the crag 
had towered, now appeared only a great and jagged rent 
in the limestone, through which the sky peered down. 

An indescribable chaos of fragments, blocks, debris, 
detritus of all kinds half choked the river below; and the 
swift current, suddenly blocked, now foamed and chafed 
with lathering fury through the newly fallen obstacle. 

Broken short off, the path stopped not a hundred yards 
in front of her. 

As she stood there, dazed and dumb, harkening the terrible cries that rose from those still not dead in the ruins, 
she perceived some of the Folk gathered along the brink of 
the new chasm. More and more kept coming from the scant 
half of the caves still left. And all, dazed and numbed 
like herself, stood there peering down with vacant looks. 

Beatrice first recovered wit. Dimly she understood the 
truth. The cavern digging of the Folk, the burrowing and 
honeycombing through the cliff, must have sprung some 
keystone, started some " fault," or broken down some vital 
rib of the structure. 

With irresistible might it had torn loose, slid, crashed, 
leaped into the caiion, carrying with it how many lives she 
knew not. 

All she knew now was that rescues must be made of siich 
as still lived, and that the bodies of the dead must be recovered. 

So with fresh strength, utterly forgetful of self, she ran 
once more down the steep terrace, calling to her folk : 

" Men! My people! Down to the river, quickly! Take 
hammers, bars, tools  go swiftly I Save the wounded! 
Go!" 

There was no sleep for any in the colony that day, that 
night, or the next day. The vast pile of debris rang with 
the sledge blows, louder than ever anvil rang ; and the torches 
flared and sparkled over the jumble of broken rock, beneath 



576 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

which now lay buried many dead  none knew how many 
nevermore to be seen of man. Great iron bars bent doubk 
with the prying of strong arms. 

Beatrice herself, flambeau in hand, directed the labor. 
And as, one by one, the wounded and the broken were released, she ordered them borne to the great cave of Bremilu, the Strong. 

Bremilu had been in the house of one Jukkos at the time 
of the catastrophe. His body was one of the first to be 
found. Beta transformed his cave into a hospital. 

And there, working with the help of three or four womaiv 
hampered in every way for lack of proper materialSp she 
labored hour after hour dressing wounds, settings broken 
bones, watching no few die, even despite the best that she 
could do. 

Old Gesafam came to seek her there with news that the 
child cried of hunger. Dazed, Beta went to nurse it; and 
then returned, in spite of the old woman's pleadings; and 
so a long time passed  how long she never knew. 

Disaster! This was her one clear realization through 
all those hours of dark and labor, anguish and despair. For 
the first time the girl felt beaten. 

Till now, through every peril, exposure and hardship, 
she had kept hope and courage. Allan had always 
been beside her  wise, and very strong to counsel and to act 

But now, alone there  all alone in face of this sudden 
devastation  sht: felt at the end of her resources. She had 
to struggle to hold her reason, to use her native judgment, 
common sense and skill. 

The work of rescue came to an end at last. All were 
saved who could be. All the bodies that could be reached 
had been carried into still another cave, not far from the 
path of the disaster. All the wounds and injuries had 
been dressed, and now Beatrice knew her force was at an 
end. She could do no more. 

Drained of energy, spent, broken, she dragged herself iq;> 



THE TREASON OF H'YEMBA 577 

the path again. In front of the cave of H'yemba, the 

smith, a group of survivors had gathered. 

Dimly she sensed that the ugly fellow was haranguing 
them with loud and bitter words. As she came past, the 
speech died; but many lowering and evil looks were cast 
on her, and a low murmur  sullen and ominous  followed 
her on up the terrace. 

Too exhausted even to note it or to care, she staggered 
back to Cliff Villa, flung herself on the bed, and slept. 

How long? She could not tell when she awoke again. 
Only she knew that a dim light, as of evening, was glimmering in at the doorway, and that her child was in the bed 
beside her, 

" Gesafam ! " she called, for she heard some one moving 
in the cave. " Bring nie water 1 " 

There came no answer. Beta repeated the command. A 
curious, sneering mockery startled her. Still clad in her 
loose brown cloak, belted at the waist  for she had thrown 
herself upon the bed fully clad  she sat up, peering by 
the light of the fireplace into the half dark of the room, 

A third time she called the old woman. 

" It is useless! " cried a voice, " She will not come to 
help you. See, I have bound her  and now she lies in 
that further chamber of the cave, helpless. For it is not 
with her I would speak, but with you. And you shall hear 
me." 

"H'yemba!" cried Beatrice, startled, suddenly recognizing the squat and brutal figure that now, a threat in every 
gesture, approached the bed. "Out! Out of here, I say! 
How dare you enter my house? You shall pay heavily for 
this great insult when the master comes. Out and away ! " 

The ugly fellow only laughed menacingly. 

" No, I shall not go, and there will be no payment," he 
retorted in his own speech, "And you must hear mc, for 
now I, and not he. shall be the master here." 

Beta sprang from the bed and faced him. 

" Go, or 1 shoot you down like a dog! " she threatened. 




578 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

He sneered. 

" There will be no shooting," he answered coolly. " But 
there will be speech for you to hear. Now listen 1 Tkis 
is what ye brought us here to? The man and you? Tkisf 
To death and wo? To accidents and perishings? 

' Ye brought us to hardship and to battle, not to peace 1 
With lies, deceptions and false promises ye enticed us! 
We were safe and happy in our homes in the Abyss beside 
the sunless sea, till ye fell thither in your air-boat from 
these cursed regions. We  " 

 For this speech ye shall surely die when the master 
comes ! " cried she. '' This is treason, and the penalty of 
it is death I " 

He continued, paying no heed : 

" We had no need of you, your ways, or your place. But 
the man Allan would rule or he would ruin. He overthrew 
and killed our chief, the great Kamrou himself  Kamrou 
the Terrible! To us he brought dissensions. From us he 
bore the patriarch away and slew him, and then made us a 
great falsehood in that matter. 

 So he enticed us all. And ye behold the great disaster 
and the death ! The man Allan has deserted us all to perish 
here. Coward in his heart, he has abandoned you as well! 
Gone once more to safety and ease, below in the Abyss, there 
to rule the rest of the Folk, there to take wives according 
to our law, while we die here ! ' 

Menacingly he advanced toward the dumb-stricken woman, his face ablaze with evil passion. 

' Gremnya!" (coward) he shouted. ''Weakling at 
heart. Great boaster, doer of little deeds t Even you, who 
would be our mistress, he has abandoned even his own 
son he has forsaken. A rotten breed, truly I And we diel 

" But listen now. This shall not be ! I, H'yemba, the 
smith, the strongest of all, will not permit it I will be 
ruler here, if any live to be ruled! And you shall be my 
serving-maid  your son my slave ! " 

Aghast, struck dumb by this wild tempest of rdidlioii, 



THE TREASON OF H'YEMBA 579 

Beatrice recoiled. His face showed like a while blur in 
the gloom. 

" Allan ! " she gasped. " My Allan  " 

The huge smith laughed a venomous laugh that echoed 
through the cave. 

"Ha! Ye call on the coward?" he mocked, advancing 
on her. " On the coward who cannot hear, and would not 
save you it he could? Behold now ye shall kneel to me and 
call me master! And my words from now ye shall obey!" 

She snatched for her pistol. It was not there. In the 
excitement of the past hours she had forgotten to buckle 
it on. She was unarmed. 

H'yemba already grasped for her, to force her down upon 
the floor, kneeling to him  to make her call him master. 

Already his strong and hairy fingers had all but seized her 
robe. 

But she, lithe and agile, evaded the grip. To the fire 
she sprang. She caught up a flaming stick that lay upon 
the hearth. With a cry she dashed it full into his glaring 
eyes. 

So sudden was the attack that H'yemba had no time 
even to ward it ofl with his hands. Fair in the face the 
scorching flame struck home. 

Howling, blinded, stricken, he staggered back ; beat tht 
air with vain blows and retreated toward the door. 

As he went he poured upon her a torrent of the most 
hideous imprecations known to their speech  and they were 
many. 

But she, undaunted now, feeling her power and her 
strength again, followed close. And like blows of a flail, 
the sputtering, flaring flame beat down upon his head, neck, 
shoulders. 

His hair was blazing now; a smell of scorched flesh diffused itself through the cavern. 

" Go ! Go, dog! " she shouted, maddened and furious, in 
consuming rage and hate. " Coward 1 Slanderer and liar I 
Go, ere I kill you now ! " 



S8o DARKNESS AND DAWN 

In panic-stricken fright, unable to see, trying in vam to 
ward off the devastating, torturing whip of flame and to extinguish the fire ravaging his hair, the brute half ran, half 
fell out of the cave. 

Down the steep path he staggered, yelling curses; down 
away, anywhere away from this pursuing fury. 

But the woman, outraged in all her inmost sacred tendernesses, her love for child and husband, still drove him 
with the blazing scourge  drove, till the torch was beaten 
to extinction  drove, till the smith took refuge in his own 
cave. 

There, being spent and weary, she let him lie and hoiri. 
Exhausted, terribly shaken in body and soul, yet her eyes 
triumphant, she once more climbed the precipitous path to 
her own dwelling. The torch she flung away, down the 
caiion into the river. 

She ran to the far recess of the cave, found Gesafam 
indeed bound and helpless, and quickly freed her. 

The old woman was shaking like a leaf, and could ve no 
coherent account of what had happened. Beta made her 
lie down on the couch, and herself prepared a bowl of hot 
broth for the faithful nurse. 

Then she bethought herself of the pistol Allan had given 
her. 

" I must never take that off again, whatever hjpena," 
said she. " But  where is it now ? " 

In vain she hunted for it on the table, the floor, the shelves, 
and in the closets Allan had built. In vain she ransacked 
the whole cave. 

The pistol, belt, and cartridges  all were gcme. 


CHAPTER XX III 

THE RETURN OF THE MASTER 

Suddenly finding herself very much alarmed and shaken, 
Beatrice sat down in the low chair beside her bed, and covering her face with both hands tried to think. 

The old woman, somewhat recovered, moved about with 
words of pity and indignation, and sought to make speech 
with her, but she paid no heed. Now, if ever, she had need 
of self -searching of courage and enterprise. And all at 
once she found that, despite everything, she was only a 
woman. 

Her passion spent, she felt a desperate need of a man's 
strength, advice, support. In disarray she sat there, striving to collect her reason. 

Her robe was torn, and her loosened hair, escaping from 
its golden pins, cascaded all about her shoulders. Loudly 
her heart throbbed; a certain shivering had taken possession of her, and all at once she noticed that her brow was 
burning. 

Resolutely she tried to put her weakness from her, and 
marshalled her thoughts. In the bed her son still slept 
quietly, his fat fist protruding from the clothes, his ruddy, 
healthy little face half buried in the pillow. 

A great, overpowering wave of mother-love swept her 
heart. She leaned forward, and through lids now teardimmed, with eyes no longer angry, peered at the child  her 
child and Allan's. 

" For your sake  for yours if not for mine," she whispered, "I must be strong!" 



582 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

She thought. 

" Evidently some great conspiracy is going on here. Beyond and apart from the calamity of the landslide, some 
other and even greater peril menaces the colony ! " 

She reflected on the incident of her pistol and ammunition being stolen. 

" There can be no doubt that H'yemba did that," she 
decided. ''In the confusion of the catastrophe he has 
disarmed me. That means well-planned rebellion  and at 
this time it will be fatal! Now, above all else, we must 
work in harmony, stand fast, close up the ranks I This 
must not be ! " 

Yet she could see no way clear to crush the danger. 
What could she do against so many  nearly all provided 
with firearms? Why had H'yemba even taken the trouble 
to steal her weapon? 

" Coward ! " she exclaimed. " Afraid for his own life  
afraid even to face me, so long as I had a pistol I As I 
live, and heaven is above me, in case of civil war he shall 
be the first to die ! " 

She summoned Gesafam. 

" Go, now I " she commanded ; ' go among the remaining Folk and secretly find me a pistol, with anununitioa 
Steal them if you must. Say nothing, and return as quickly 
as you can. There be many guns among the Folk. I must 
have one. Go ! " 

" O, Yulcia, will there be fighting again ? ' 

"I know not. Ask no questions, but obey! 

Trembling  shaking her head and muttering strange 
things, the old woman departed. 

She returned in a quarter-hour with not only one. but 
two pistols and several ammunition-belts cleverly concealed 
beneath her robe. Beta seized them gladly with a sudden 
return of confidence. 

But the old woman, though shesaid no word, eyed her 
mistress in a strange, disquieting manner. What had she 



THE RETURN OFTHE MASTER 583 

heard, or seen, down in the caves? Beatrice had now 
neither time nor inclination to ask, 

" Listen, old mother," she commanded. " I am now 
going to leave you and my son here together. After I am 
gone lock the door. Let no one in. I alone shall enter. 
My signal shall be two knocks on the door, then a pause, 
 then three. Do not open till you hear that signal. You 
understand me?" 

"I understand and I obey, O Yulcia naa!" 

" It is well. Guard my son as your life. Now I go to 
see the wounded and the sick again ! " 

The old woman let her out and carefully barred the door 
behind her. Beatrice, unafraid, with both her weapons 
lying loose in their holsters, belted under her robe, advanced 
alone down. the terrace path. 

Her hair had once more been bound up. She had recovered something of her poise and strength. The realization of her mission inspired her to any sacrifice. 

 It's all for your sake, Allan," she whispered as she 
went. "All for yours and our boy's!" 

Far beneath her New Hope River purled and sparkled 
in the morning sun. Beyond, the far and vivid tropic forest stretched in wild beauty to the hills that marked the 
world's end-  those hills beyond which  

She put away the thought, refusing to admit even the 
possibility of Allan's failure, or accident, or death. 

' He will come back to me! " she said bravely and proudly, for a moment stopping to face the sun. " He will come 
back from beyond those hills and trackless woods 1 He 
will come back  to us!" 

Again she turned, and descending some dozen steps in 
the terrace path, once more reached the doorway of the 
hospital cave. 

Pausing not, hesitating not, she lifted the rude latch and 
pushed. 

The door refused to give. 

Again she tried more forcibly. 




584 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

It still resisted. 

Throwing all her strength against the barrier, she fought 
to thrust it inward. It would not budge. 

" Barred ! " she exclaimed, aghast. 

Only too true. During her absence, though how or by 
whom she could not know, the door had been impassably 
closed to keep her out! 

Who, now, was working against her will? Could it be 
that H'yemba, all burned and blinded as he was, could 
have returned so soon and once more set himself to thwart 
her? And if not the smith, then who? 

" Rebellion ! " she exclaimed. ' It's spreading  growing  now, at the very minute when I should have help, 
faith and cooperation! 

" Open ! Open, in the name of the law that has been 
given you  our law ! " she cried loudly in the Menicaan 
tongue. 

No answer. 

She snatched out a pistol, and with the butt loudly smote 
the planks of palm-wood. Within, the echoes rumbled 
dully, but no human voice replied. 

" Traitors ! Cowards I " she defied the opposing power. 
 I, a woman, your mistress, am come to save you, and 
you bar me out ! Wo on you 1 Wo ! 

Waiting not, but now with greater haste, she ran down 
along the pathway toward the next door. 

That, too, was sealed. And the next, and the fourth, 
and all, every one, both on the upper and the lower terrace, all  all were barricaded, even to the great gap made 
by the landslide. 

From within no sound, no reply, no slightest sign that 
any heard or noticed her. Dumb, mute, passive, invincible 
rebellion ! 

In vain she called, commanded, pleaded, explained, 
entreated. No answer. The white barbarians, all banded 
apainst her now, had shut themselves up with their wounded 
and their dying, to wait their destiny alone. 



THE RETURN OFTHE MASTER 585 

How many were already dead? How many might yet be 
saved, who would die without her help? She could not 
tell. The uncertainly maddened her. 

" If they den up, that way," she said, " pestilence may 
break out among them and all may die ! And then what ? 
If I'm left all alone in the wilderness with Gesafam and 
the boy what then?" 

The thought was too horrible for contemplation. So 
many blows had crashed home to her sou! the past week  
even the past few hours  that the girl felt numbed and 
dazed as in a nightmare. 

It was, it must be, all some frightful unreality  Allan's 
absence, the avalanche, H'yemba's attack, and this widespread, silent defiance of her power. 

Only a few days before Allan had been there with her  
strong, vigorous, confident. 

Authority had been supreme. Labor, content, prosperity 
had reigned. Health and life and vigor had been everywhere. On the horizon of existence no cloud; none over 
the sun of progress. 

And now, suddenly  annihilation I 

With a groan that was a sob, her face drawn and pale, 
eyes fixed and unseeing, Beatrice turned back up the terrace path, back up tlie sleep, toward the only door still at 
her command  Hope Villa, 

Back toward the only one of these strange Folk still 
loyal; back toward her child. 

Her head felt strangely giddy. The depths at her left 
hand, below the parapet of stone, seemed to be calling  
calling insistently. Before her sight something like a veil 
was drawn ; and yet it was not a veil, but a peculiar hltt, 
now and then intershot with sparkles of pale light. 

Through her mind flittered for the first time something 
like an adequate realization of the vast, abysmal gulf in 
culture-status still yawning between these barbarians and 
Allan and herself. 




586 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" Civilization," she stammered in an odd voice ; " why 
that means  generations I " 

AH at once she wondered if she were going to faint 
A sudden pain had stabbed her temples; a humming had 
attacked her ears. 

She put out her hand against the rock wall of the cliff 
at the right to steady herself. Her mouth felt hot and very 
dry. 

 I  I must get back home/' she said weakly. " I'm not 
at all well  this morning. Overexertion  " 

Painfully she began to climb the stepped path toward the 
upper level and Cliff Villa. And again it seemed to her 
the depths were calling ; but now she felt positive she heard 
a voicea voice she knew but could not exactly place a 
hail very far away yet near  all very strange, unreal and 
terrifying. 

"Oh  am I going to be ill?" she panted. "No, no! 
I mustn't! For the boy's sake, I mustn't I I can't!" 

With a tremendous effort, now crawling rather than 
walking  for her knees were as water  the girl dragged 
herself up the path almost to her doorway. 

Again she heard the call, this time no hallucination, but 
reality. 

" Beatrice! Beatrice!" the voice was shouting. /' O-he! 
Beatrice!" 

His hail ! Allan's ! 

Her heart stopped, a long minute, and then, leaping with 
joy, a very anguish of revulsion from long pain, thrashed 
terribly in her breast. 

Gasping with emotion, burned with the first sudden onset 
of a consuming fever, half-blind, shivering, parched and 
in agony, the girl made a tremendous effort to hear, to see, 
to understand. 

"Allan! Allan !" she shouted wildly. "Where are you? 
Wlieref " 

"Beatrice! Here! On the bridge! Vm coming!" 

She turned her dimming eyes toward the suspension


THE RETURN OF THE MASTER 587 

bridge hung high alwve the swift and lashing rapids of New 
Hope River  the bridge, a cobweb-strand in space, across 
the chasni. 

There it seemed to her, though now she could be sure 
of nothing, so strangely did the earth and sky and cHEEs, 
the bridge, the jungle, sll dance and interplay  there, it 
seemed, she saw a moving figure. 

Disheveled, torn, almost naked, lame and slow, yet with 
something still of power and command in its bearing, this 
figure was advancing over the swaying path of bamboorods lashed to the cables of twisted fiber. 

Now it halted as in exhaustion and great pain ; now, once 
more, it struggled forward, limping, foot by foot ; crawling, 
hanging fast to the ropes like some great insect meshed in 
the wind-swung filaments. 

She saw it, and she knew the truth at last. 

" Allan ! Allan cmne quick 1 Help me  kelp ,' " 

Then she collapsed. At her door she fell. AH things 
blent and swirled, faded, darkened. 

She knew no more. 



 y 




CHAPTER XXIV 

"the boy is gone!" 

The man, weak, wounded, racked with exhaustion from 
the terrible ordeal of the past days, felt fresh vigor le 
through his spent veins at sight of her distress, afar. 

He broke into a strange, limping run across the sljgiit 
and shaking bridge ; and as he ran he called to her, words 
of cheer and greeting, words of encouragement and love. 

But when, having penetrated the palisaded area and 
stumbled down the terraces, he reached her side, he stopped 
short, shaking, speechless, with wide and terror-strkkcn 
eyes. 

"Beatrice! Beta! My God, what's whafs happened 
here?" he stammered, kneeling beside her, raising her in 
his weakened arms, covering her pallid face with kisses, 
chafing her throat, her temples, her hands. 

The girl gave no sign of returning consciousness. Allan 
stared about him, sensing a great and devastating change 
since his departure, but as yet unable to comprehend its 
nature. 

Giddy himself with loss of blood and terrible fatigues. 
he hardly more than half saw what lay before him; yet 
he knew catastrophe had befallen Settlement Qiffs. 

The river now foamed through strange new obstructions. 
A whole section of the cliff was gone. No sign of life 
at all was to be seen anywhere down the terraces or paths. 

None of the Folk, their blinking eyes shielded by thdr 
mica glasses from the morning sun, were drying fish or 
fruit at the frames. 

588 



'THE BOY IS GONE !' 589 

The nets hung brown, and stiff, and dry; they should, 
at this hour, have been limp and wet, from the night's fishing. The life of the colony, he knew, had suddenly and 
for some incomprehensible reason stopped, as a watch stops 
when the spring is broken. 

And, worse than all, here Beatrice now lay in his arms. 
stricken by some strange malady. He could not know the 
cause  the sleepless nights, the terrible toil, the shattering 
nen,ous strain of catastrophe, of nursing, of the swift 
rebellion. 

But he saw plainly now, the girl was burning with fever. 
And, raising his face to heaven, he uttered a cry, half a 
groan, half 3 sob  the cry of a soul racked too long upon 
the torture-wheel of fate. 

" But but where's the boy?" he asked himself, striving to recover his self-control; trying to understand, to 
act, to save. "What's happened here? God knows! An 
earthquake? Disaster, at any rate! Beatrice! Oh, ray 
Beta! Speak to me!" 

Unable to solve any of the terrible problems now beating 
in upon him, he raised her still higher in his arms. 

Loudly he shouted for help down the terrace, calling 00 
his Folk to show themselves; to come to him and to obey. 

But though the shattered cliff rang with his commands, 
no one appeared. In all seeming as deserted and as void 
of human life as on the first day he and Beta had set foot 
there, the canon brooded under the morning sun, and for 
all answer rose only the foaming tumult of the rapids far 
below. 

" Merciful Heavens, I've got to do something!" cried 
Allan, forgetting his own lacerations and his pain, in thi3 
supreme crisis. " She  she's sick! She's got a fever 1 I've 
got to put her to bed anyhow! After that we'll sec!" 

With 3 strength he knew not lay now in his wasted arms, 
he lifted her bodily and carried her to the door of Cliff 
Villa, their home among the massive buttresses of rock. 




S90 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

But, to his vast astonishment and terror, he found the 
door refused to open. It was fast barred inside. 

Even from his own house he found himself shut out, 
an exile and a stranger ! 

Loudly he shouted for admission, savagely beat upon 
the planks, all to no purpose. There came no sound fnxn 
within, no answering word or sign. 

Eagerly listening for perhaps the cry of his child, he 
heard nothing. A tomblike silence brooded there, as in 
all the stricken colony. 

Then Allan, fired with a burning fury, laid the girl 
down again, and seizing a great boulder from the top of 
the parapet that guarded the terraced walk, dashed it 
against the door. The planks groaned and quivered, but 
held. 

Recoiling, exhausted by even this single effort, the disheveled, wounded man stared with haggard eyes at the barrier. 

The very strength he had put into that door to guard his 
treasures, his wife and his son, now defied him. And a 
curse, bitter as death, burst from his trembling lips. 

But now he heard a sound, a word, a phrase or two of 
incoherent speech. 

Whirling, he saw the girl's mouth move. In her delirium 
she was speaking. 

He knelt again beside her, cradled her in his arms, kissed 
and cherished her  and he heard broken, disjointed words 
 words that filled him with passionate rage and overpowering wo. 

" So many dead  so many !  And so many dying.  You, 
iryemba! You beast! Let me go!  Oh, when the master 
comes ! " 

Allan understood at last. His mind, now dear, despite 
the maddening torments of the past week, grasped the 
situation in a kind of supersensitive clair\''oyance. 

As by a lightning-flash on a dark night, so now the blackness of his wonder, of this mystery, all stood instantly 
illumined. He understood. 



" T H E E O Y I S G O N E !  591 

" What incredible fiendishness ! " he exclaimed, quite 
slowly, as though unable to imagine it in human bounds. 
" At a time of disaster and of death, such as has smitten 
the colony  what hellish villainy!" 

He said no more, but in his eyes burned the fire that 
meant death, instant and without reprieve. 

First he looked to his automatic; but, alas, not one cartridge remained either in its magazine or in the pouches of 
his belt. The fouled and blackened barrel told something 
of the terrible story of the past few days. 

" Gone, ail gone," he muttered ; but, with sudden inspiration, bent over the girl. 

"Ah! Ammunition again 1" 

Quickly he reloaded from her belts. One belt he buckled 
round his waist. Then, pistol in hand, he thought swiftly. 

Thus his mind ran: " The first thing to do is look out 
for Beatrice, and make her comfortable  find out what 
the matter is with her, and give treatment. I need fresh 
water, but I daren't go down to the river for it and leave 
her here. At any minute H'yemba may appear. And 
when he does, I must see him first. 

" Evidently the thing most necessary is to gain access 
to our home. How can it be locked, inside, when Beatrice 
is here? Heaven only knows! There may be enemies in 
there at this minute. H'yemba may be there  " 

Anguish pierced liis soul at thought of his son now possibly in the smith's power. 

" By God 1 " he cried, " something has got to be done, 
and quick ! " 

His rage was growing by leaps and bounds. 

He advanced to the door, and putting the muzzle of his 
automatic almost on the lock, shattered it with six heavy 
bullets. 

Again he dashed the boulder against the door. It groaned 
and gave. 

Reloading ere he ventured in, he now set his shoulder 




592 D A R K N E S S A N D D A W N 

to the door and forced it slowly open, with the pistol 
always ready in his right hand. 

Keenly his eyes sought out the darkened comers of the 
room. Here, there they pierced, striving to determine 
whether any ambushed foe were lying there in wait tor 
him. 

" Surrender ! " he cried loudly in the Merucaan tongue. 
" If there be any here who war with me, surrender! At 
the first sign of fight, you die!" 

No answer. 

Still leaving the girl beside the broken door till he should 
feel positive there was no peril  and always filled with a 
vast wonder how the door could have been locked from 
within  Allan advanced slowly, cautiously, into their home. 

He was cool now  cool and strong again. The frightful 
perils and exposures of the week past seemed to have fallen 
from him like an outworn mantle. 

He ignored his pain and weakness as though such things 
were not. And, with index on trigger, eyes watchful and 
keen, he scouted down the cave-dwelling. 

Suddenly he stopped. 

" Who's there ? " he challenged loudly. 

At the left of the room, not far from the big fireplace, 
he had perceived a dim, vague figure, prone upon the floor. 

 Ans7ver, or I shoot! " 

But the figure remained motionless. Allan realized there 
was no fight in it. Still cautiously, however, he advanced. 

Now he touched the figure with his foot, now bent above 
it and peered down. 

"Old Gesafam! Heaven above! Wounded 1 What 
does this mean ? " 

Starting back, he stared in horror at the old woman, 
stunned and motionless, with the blood coagulating along 
an ugly cut on her forehead. 

Then, as though a prescience had swept his being, he 
sprang to the bed. 



"THE BOY IS GONEl" 



593 



"My soni My boyt Where are yoa?" he shouted 

hoarsely. 

With a shaking haod he flung down the bedclothct < 
finely woven palm fiber. 

"My boy! My boy!" 

The bed was empty. His son had disappeared. 



r' 




CHAPTER XXV 

THE FALL OF H'yEMBA 

Blinded with staggering grief and terror, stunned, stricken, 
all but annihilated, the man recoiled. 

Then, with a cry, he sprang to the bed again, and now 
in a very passion of eagerness explored it. His trembliiis 
hands dragged all the bedding off and threw it broadcast 
By the dim light he peered with wide and terror-smitten 
eyes. 
'My boy!'' he choked. "My boy!" 

But beyond all manner of doubt the boy had been stolen. 

Unable to understand, or think, or plan, Allan stood 
there, his face ghastly, his heart quivering within him. 

What could have happened? How and why? If the 
door had been securely locked and the old nurse been with 
the child, how could the kidnapper have borne him away? 

What? How? Why? 

More, ever more, questions crowded the man's brain, all 
equally without answer. / 

But now, he dimly realized, was no time for solving 
problems. The minute demanded swift and drastic action. 
He must find, must save, his son! After that other riddles 
could he unraveled. 

"HVemba!" he cried hoarsely. "This is H'yemba's 
work I Revenge and hate have driven him to rebel again. 
To try to seize Beatrice ! To steal my son ! At this time 
of peril and affliction, above all others 1 H'yembal The 
smith must die ! " 

But first he realized he must get Beatrice into safely. 

594 




THE FALL OF H'YEMBA 595 

In haste he ran to the door, picked up the girl and 
carried her to the bed. Here he disposed her at ease, covered her with the bedding, and bathed her face and hands 
with water from the cooling-jar. 

The old nurse he laid upon the broad couch by the fire 
and likewise tended. He saw now she had been struck with 
a stone ax, a glancing blow, severe, but not necessarily 
fatal. 

'' Probably trying to defend the boy I  thought he. 
" Brave heart ! Faithful even unto death  if death be 
your reward I " 

Leaving her, he returned to his wife. 

Now, he well understood, he had no time for emotion. 
There must be no false move. Even at the ocpense of a 
little time, he must plan the campaign with skill and execute it with relentless energy. 

He alone now stood for power, rule, order, law, in this 
disintegrated community  this colony racked with disaster, 
anarchy and death. 

Upon him alone now depended its whcde fate and futnre, 
and, with it, the fate and future of the world. 

' Merciful Lord, what a situation I'' he whispered.  At 
home, disruption and savagery. Outside, the Horde the 
Horde now pressing onward after me I 

He sat down beside the bed and forced himsdf to think. 
Weak as he was and wounded with a spear-thrust in the 
lower leg as well as a jagged cut across the breast, he felt 
that he might still keep strength enough for a few hoars 
more of toil. 

Of a sudden he realized an over-powering thirst Till 
now he had not felt it. He arose, drank deq>ly from the 
jar, then  something cooler and more cafan <xice more 
returned to Beatrice. 

" The first thing is to help her,'' he sakL " I 1 
losing my wits and rushing out unprepared to y. 

H H'yemba has stolen him it's certain the boy i 

beyond my present power in some far recess of t 




596 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

communicating rabbit-warren of caves below there in the 
cliff. 

'' I feel positive no bodily harm will be done the child 
H yemba will hold him for power over me. He will try 
to exact terms  even to leadership in the colony, even to 
possession of Beatrice. And the penalty of refusal may 
be the boy's death  " 

He shuddered profoundly, and with both wasted hands 
covered his face. For a moment madness sought to possess 
him. 

He felt a wild desire to shout imprecations, to rush out, 
fling himself against the cave-door of H'yemba and riddle 
it with bullets  but presently calm returned again. For 
in Stern's nature lay nothing of hysteria. Reason and calm 
judgment dominated. And before he acted he always 
reckoned every pro and con. 

'' It must be a battle of wits as well as force/' thought 
he. ' A little time will decide all that. For now Beatrice 
demands my first care and thought I " 

Now he examined the girl once more. Closing the door 
and lighting the bronze lamp, he carefully studied the sick 
woman, noting her symptoms, pulse and respiration. 

''What to do?" he asked himself. "What means to 
take ? " 

Pie arose and rummaged the stores for drugs. Above 
all, he must break the fever. He therefore prepared and 
administered a powerful febrifuge, covered the girl with 
all the available bedding, and determined, if possible, to 
make her sweat. This done, he found no further means at 
hand and now turned his attention once more to Gesafaxn. 

Her wound he bathed and bandaged and, having given 
her a stiff drink of brandy, poured between resisting teeth 
which he had to separate with his knife-blade, he presently 
perceived some signs of returning consciousness. 

But, though he questioned the old woman and tried desperately to make her answer, he could get no coherent 
information. 



THEFALLOFH'YEMBA 597 

Only the name of H'yemba and some few disconnected 
mutterings of terror rewarded him. He knew now, how " 
ever, with positive certainty that the smith was responsible 
for the kidnapping of his son. 

"And that." said he, "means I must seek him out at 
once. All I ask is just one sight of him. One sight, one 
bullet  and the score is paid!" 

He arose and. again making sure his automatic was in 
complete readiness, stood for a second in thought. Whatever he was now to do must be done quickly. 

In a few hours, at the outside, he knewjhe vanguard 
of the pursuing Horde would enter the last valley on the 
other side of the caiion. By afternoon another battle might 
be on. 

" Whatever happens, I must get my grip on the colony 
again at once!" he realized. "Such of the Folk as are 
still sound must be rallied. Otherwise nothing but annihilation awaits us all!" 

But, even as he faced the exit of Cliff Villa, all at once 
the door was burled violently open and a harsh, discordant 
cry of hatred and defiance burst into the cave. 

Stern saw the detested figure of H'yemba standing there. 
loose-hung. jx>werful, barbaric, his eyes blinking evilly behind the mica screens that Allan himself had made for him. 

With a cry Allan started forward. 

"My son!" he gasped. 

There, clutched in the smith's left arm, lay the boy! 

Allan heard his child crying as in pain, and rage swept 
every caution to the winds. 

He sprang toward H'yemba. cursing; but the smith, with 
a beast-laugh, raised his right hand. 

" Master ! " he mocked. " No nearer or ye die I " 

Allan, aghast, saw the flicker of sunlight on a pistolbarrel. With only too true an aim, H'yemba had him covered. 

Came a little pause, tense as steel wire. Somewhere down 
the terrace sounded a murmur of voices. Allan seemed 



y 




598 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

to sense that the rebel had now gathered his forces and 
that a general attack was imminent. 

Time! At all hazards he must gain a moment's time! 

" H 'yemba ! " cried he. " What is your speech with me, 
your master ? ' 

" Master ? " sneered the smith again. " My slave I Power 
has passed from you to me. From you, who speak the 
false, who entrap us here to suffer and die, who slay and 
ruin us, to me, who will yet lead the people back to their 
far home, to safety and to life ! ' 

" You lie, hound ! " 

The smith laughed bitterly. 

" That shall be seen  who lies ! " he gibed. " But now 
power is mine. I have your son in my hand Move only 
and I fling him from the cliff I' 

Allan felt his brain whirl; all things seemed to turn 
about him. But he fought off his faintness, and in a shaken 
voice once more demanded : 

"What terms, H'yemba?" 

" Slavery for you and yours ! Your son shall be my 
serf ; your woman my chattel I Ha, that wcxnan I She has 
already fought me, like one of these strange woods-beasts 
you have made us kill ! See ! My hair is burned and my 
flesh blistered with her fire-beating! But when I hold 
her in these hands then she shall pay for all, the zmedma! 

Stern's hand twitched, with the automatic gripped in 
the fingers, but the blacksmith cried a warning. 

" Raise not that hand, slave ! " he ordered- " You cannot shoot without the danger of killing this vile spawn of 
yours! And remember, too, the river lies far below, and 
very sharp are the waiting rocks! 

" Fool that you arc, that think yourself so wise I To leave 
this place with me ! With me, skilled in all labors of metal 
and stone, strong to cut j)assage-ways   

"You devil! You hewed a way into my house?" 

Hyiiiba laus:hed brutally. 

'' Silently, steadily, I labored I " he boasted. " And b 




THE FALL OF H'YEMBA 599 

hold the reward ! Power for me ; eternal slavery for yoa 
and all your blood  if any live I" 

Insane with rage and hate, Allan nevertheless realized 
that now all depended on keeping his thought and nerve. 

One single premature move and his son would inevitably 
be hurled over the parapet, down two hundred and fifty 
feet to the river-bed below. At all hazards, he must kocp 
cool! 

The smith, after all only a barbarian and of limited mtdligence, had not even thought of the obvious command to 
make Stem drop his pistol on the floor. 

Upon this oversight now hung all Allan's hopes. 

Even though the man's retainers might rush the cave 
and slaughter all, yet in Allan's heart burned a dear and 
steady flame of hot desire to compass H'yemba's death. 

And as the smith now loudly boasted, insulted, vilified, 
in the true manner of the savage, imperceptibly, inch by 
inch, Allan was turning his pistol-barrd upward. 

Higher, higher, bit by bit it crept toward the horizontal 
Unaccustomed to shoot from the hip, Allan realized that 
right before him lay a supreme test of nerve and maricsmanship and skill. 

To shoot and kill his boy  the thought was too hideous 
even to be considered. His father-heart yearned toward 
the frightened, crying child there in the traitor's grip. 

The unconscious form of Beatrice fever-burned and panting on the bed, seemed calling abud to him: ''Aim true, 
Allan! Aim true!' 

For one false shot inevitably sealed the child's death. 
To wound H yemba and not kill him meant the catastrophe. 
If the bullet failed to enter brain or heart, H'yembft 
though mortally hurt would of a surety, with his last 
quiver of strength, sling the boy outward over the dizzying parapet. 

Allan prayed ; yet his prayer was wordless, formless and 
unconscious. 

He dared not glance down A the awfamatir. His qres 




600 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

must hold the smith's. And he must speak, must parlqi 
at all hazards must still gain another moment's respite. 

What Allan said in those last terrible, eternal seconds he 
could never afterward recall. 

He only knew he was treating with the enemy, making 
terms, listening, answering  all with mechanical sub-consciousness. 

His real personality, his true ego, was absolutely absorbed 
in the one vital all-deciding problem of that stiffeniiig pistolhand. 

Suddenly something seemed to cry in his car: 

" Y'oit have it now! Fire I ' 

His hand leaped back with the crashing discharge, loudechoing in the cave. 

iryeniba did not even yell. But at the second when he 
seemed to cruni])Ic all together, falling as an empty sack 
falls, some involuntary jerk of his finger sent a ballet 
zooning into the cave. 

It shattered beyond Allan in a little shower of sted and 
lead fragments, mingled with rock-dust. 

Before these had even fallen Allan was upon him. 

Neglecting for an instant the bruised and screaming 
child, who lay there struggling on the terrace-path, Allan 
seized the still-twitching body of the monstrous traitor. 

With passionate strength he dragged it to the panpct 

Below, down the path, he caught a swift glimpse of 
grouped Folk, wondering, staring, aghast. 

To them he gave no heed. 

He lifted the body, dripping bright blood. 

Silent, indomitable, disheveled, he raised it on h|fa. 

Then, with a cry : " See, ye people, how I answer 
traitors! '' he whirled it outward into the void. 

Over and over it g>Tated through vacant space. Then, 
with an echoing splash, the river took it, and the swift 
current, white-foaming, boisterous, wild, rolled it and tumbled it away, away forever, into the unknown. 

With harsh cries and a wild spatter of bullets aimed 



E-"' 


 


'MM 


 


ijJM 


f 




1 




1 


1 " ': ,'.";" s""-"





CHAPTER XXVI 

TIIK COMING OF THE HORDE 

Now that, for an hour or two at least, he felt himself 
free and master of the situation, Allan devoted himself 
with energy to the immediate situation in CliflF Villa. 

Though still weak and dazed, old Gesafam had now recovered strength and wit enough to soothe and care for the 
child. 

Allan heard from her, in a few disjointed words, all 
she knew of the kidnapping. H'yemba, she said, had suddenly appeared to her, from the remote end of the cave, 
and had tried to snatch the child. 

She had fought, but one blow of his ax had stunned 
her. Beyond this, she remembered nothing. 

Alhm sought and quickly found the aperture made by 
the smith through the limestone. 

' Evidently he'd been planning this coup for a long time," 
thought he. " The great catastrophe of the land-<slide 
broke the last bonds of order and restraint, and gave him 
his opi)ortunity. Well, it's his last villainy! FU have this 
passageway cemented up. That's all the monument hell 
ever get. It's more than he deserves!" 

lie returned to Beatrice. The girl still lay there, moaning a little in her fevered sleep. Allan watched her in 
anguish. 

' Oh, if she should die  if she should die!" thought 
he. and felt the sweat start on his forehead. " She must 
not! She can't! I won't let her!" 

A touch on his arm aroused him from his vigil. Turning, he saw Gesafam. 

602 



THE COMING OF THE HORDE 603 

" The child, O Kromno, hungers. It is crying for food I " 

Allan thought. He saw at once the impossibility of letting the boy come near its mother. Some other arrangement must be made. 

"Ah!" thought he. "I have it!" 

He gestured toward the door. 

" Go," he commanded. " Go up the path, to the palisaded place. Take this rope. Bring back, with you a shegoat. Thus shall the child be fed! " 

The old woman obeyed. In a quarter-hour she had returned, dragging a wild goat that bleated in terror. 

Then, while she watched with amazement, Allan succeeded in milking the creature ; thotigji he had to lash 
securely all four feet and throw it to the cave-floor before 
it would submit. 

He modified the milk with water and bade the old wCKnan 
administer it by means of a hit of soft clolh. Allan, Junior, 
protested with yells, but had to make the best of hard 
necessity; and. after a long and painful process, was surfeited and dozed off, Gesafam put him to bed on the 
divan by the fire. 

" A poor substitute," thought Allan, "but it will sustain 
life. He's healthy; he can stand it  he's ffot to. Thank 
God for that goat! Without it he might easily have 
starved." 

He tied the animal at the rear of the cave, and had 
Gesafam fetch a good supply of grass. Thus for the present one problem at least was solved. 

Beatrice's condition remained unchanged. Now and then 
she called for water, which he gave her plentifully. Once 
he thought she recognized him, but he could not be certain. 

And day wore on; and now the hour of noon was at 
hand. Allan knew that other duties called him. He must 
go down among the Folk and save them, too, if possible. 

Eating a little at random and making sure as always that 
his pistols were well loaded, he consigned Beatrice and the 
child into the old woman's keeping and left the cave. 



6o4 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

On the terrace he stopped a moment, gazing triumphantly 
at the bloodmarks now thickly coagulated down the rocks. 

Then, out over the canon and the forest to northward he 
peered. His eyes caught the signal-fires he knew must 
be there now, not ten miles away ; and with a nod he smiled 

 They've certainly trailed me close, the devils I " sneered 
he. " Since the minute they first attacked my two men 
and me, trying to repair the disabled Pauillac in that infernal valley so far to northward, they haven't given me an 
hour's respite! Before night there'll be warl Well, let 
them come. The quicker now the better ! " 

Then he turned, and with a determined step, still clad 
in liis grotesque rags, descended toward the caves of the 
Folk, such as still were left. 

Where all had been resistance and defiant surliness 
before, now all had become obedience and worship. He 
understood enough of the barbarian psychology to know 
that power, strength and dominance  and these alone  
commanded respect with the Folk. 

And among tlicm all, those who had not seen as well as 
those that had, the sudden, dramatic, annihilating downfall of U'yemla had again cemented the bonds of solidarity 
more closely than ever. 

The sight of that arch-rebers body hurled from the paraj)et had effectually tamed them, every one. No longer was 
there any murmur in their caves, no thought save of obe(Hencc and worship. 

" It's not what I want/' reflected Allan. " I want intelligent cooperation, not adulation. I want democracy! But, 
damn it! if they can't understand, then I must rule a 
while. And rule T will  and they shall obey or die!" 

Quickly he got in touch with the situation. From cave 
to cave he went, estimating the damage. At the great gap 
in the terrace he stood and carefully observed the wreckage in the river-bed below. 

He visited the hospital-cave, administered medicines, 
v!iaiigc:d dressings and labored for his Folk as though no 



THE COMING OF THE HORDE 605 

shadow of rebellion ever had come 'twixt them and him. 

The news of Bremilu's death moved him profoundly. 
Bremilu had been one of his two most competent and 
trusted followers, and Allan, loo, felt a strong personal affection for the man who had saved his life that first night 
at the cliffs. 

Beside the body he stood, in the morgue-cave whither 
it had been borne. With bowed head the master looked 
upon the man ; and from his eyes fell tears ; and in his heart 
he felt a vacant place not soon to be made whole. 

With profound emotion he took Bremilu's cold hand 
in his  the hand that had so deftly and so powerfully 
stricken down the gorilla  and for a while held it, gazing 
on the dead man's face. 

" Good-by," said he at length. "You were a brave heart 
and a (rue. Never shall you be forgotten. Good-by ! " 

He summoned a huge fellow named Frumuos, now the 
most intelligent of the Folk remaining, and together they 
directed the work of carrying the bodies up to the cliff-tOp 
and there burying them. 

By the middle of the afternoon some semblance of order 
and control had become organized in the colony. He 
returned to Chff Villa, leaving strict orders for Frumuos 
to call him in case of need. 

Very beautiful the world was that afternoon. In the 
soft south wind the fronded palms across the river were 
bowing and nodding gracefully. Overhead, dazzling clouds 
drifted northward. 

It seemed to him he could almost hear the rustle of the 
dry undergrowth, parched by the past fortnight of exceptionally hot weather; but. above all. rose the eternal babble 
of the rapids. High in air, a vulture wheeled its untiring 
spirals. At sight of it he frowned. It reminded him of 
the Pauillac, now wrecked far beyond the horizon, where 
the Horde had trapped him. He shuddered, for the memories of the past week were infinitely horrible, and he longed 
only to forget. 




6o6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

With a last glance at the scene, over which the ominous 
threads of smoke now drifted in considerable numbers, he 
frowned. He reentered the villa. 

"No matter what happens now," he muttered, "Tvc 
got to snatch a few minutes rest. Otherwise, I'm liable to 
drop in my tracks. And, above all, I must try to pull 
through. For on me, and me alone, now everything (tepends ! " 

lie sat down by the bed again, too stupefied by the toxins 
of fatigue and exhaustion to do more than note that Beatrice was, at any rate, no worse. 

Human effort and emotion had, in fact, reached their 
extreme climax in him. He felt numb all over, in body, 
mind and soul. A weaker man would have succumbed 
long ago to but half the hardships he had struggled through. 
Now he must rest a bit. 

"Bring water, Gesafam!" he commanded. When she 
had obeyed, he let her wash his wounds and dress them 
with leaves and ointment. Then he himself bandaged them, 
his head nodding, eyes already drooping shut from moment 
to moment. 

His head sank on the bed, and one hand sought the girl's. 
Despite his wonderful vitality and strength, Allan was on 
the verge of collapse. 

Vague and confused thoughts wandered through his unsettled brain. 

What was the destiny of the colony to be, now that the 
Pauillac was lost and so many of the Folk wiped out? 
Were there any hopes of ultimate success? And the 
Horde, what of that? How long a respite might be counted 
on before the inevitable, decisive battle? 

A score, a hundred questions, more and more illusory, 
blent and faded and reformed in his overtaxed mind. 

Then, blessed as a balm, sleep took him. 

A violent shaking roused him from dead slumber. Old 
Gesafam stood there beside him. She had him by the ann. 



THE COMING OF THE HORDE 607 

"Waken, O master!" she was crying. "O Kromtio, 
rouse! For now there is great need!" 

Dazed, he started up. 

"What  what is it now? More trouble?" 

She pointed toward the door. 

" Beyond there, master! Beyond the river there be many 
moving creatures! Darts and arrows have begun to fall 
against the cliff. See, one has even come into the cave! 
What shall be done, master ? " 

Broad awake now, Allan ran to the door and peered 
out. 

Daylight was fading. He must have slept an hour or 
two; it had seemed but a second. In the west the sun was 
burning its way toward the horizon, through a thick set 
of haze that cloaked the rim of the earth. 

" Here, master! See!" 

Stooping, she picked up a long, slight object and handed 
it to him. 

' One of their poisoned darts, so help me! " he exclaimed. 
" Cast that into the fire, Gesafam. And have a care lest 
it wound you, for the slightest scratch is death I " 

While she, wondering, obeyed, he hastily reconTioilered 
the situation. 

He had felt positive the Horde, after his escape from it 
by devious and terrible ways, would track him down. 

He had known the army of the hideous little beast-folk, 
that for a year now had been slowly gathering from north 
and east for one final assault, would eventually find Settlement Cliffs and there make still another attempt to crush 
him and his. 

But, knowing all this, knowing even that the whole region 
beyond the river now swarmed with these ghastly monstrosities, the actuality appalled him. 

Now that the attack was really at hand, he felt a strange 
and sudden sense of helplessness. 

And with a bitter curse he shook his fist at the dark 
forest across the canon where  even as he looked  lie saw 







6o8 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

a movement of crouching, furtive things ; he heard a dull 
thump-thump as of clubs beating hollow logs. 

' You devils ! '' he execrated. " Oh, for a ton of Pulverite to drop among you ! " 

' Look, master, look! The bridge! The bridge!' 

He turned quickly as old Gesafam pointed up-stream. 

There, clearly outlined against the sky, he saw a dozoHa score of little, crouching figures emerge from the forest 
on the north bank, and at a clumsy run defile along the 
swaying footpath high above the rapids. 



CHAPTER XXVII 
was! 



At sight of the advance-guard of the Horde now already 
loping, crouched and ugly, over the narrow bridge to Settlement Giffs Allan's first impulse was one of absolute 
despair. 

He had expected an attack ere night, but at least he had 
hoped an hour's respite to recover a little of his strength 
and to muster all the still valid men of the Folk for resistance. Now, however, he saw even this was to be denied 
him. For already the leaders of the Horde scouts had 
passed the center of the bridge. 

Three or four minutes more and they would be inside 
the palisade, upon the cliff! 

"God! If they once get in there, we're gone!" cried 
Allan. " We're cut off from everything. Our animals 
will be slaughtered. The boy will die! They can bombard 
us with rocks from aloft. It means annihilation!" 

Already he was running up the path toward the palisade. 
Not one second was to be lost. There was no time even 
lo call a single man of the Folk to reenforce him. Singlehanded and alone he must meet the invaders' first attack. 

Panting, sweating, stumbling, lie scrambled up the steep 
terrace. And as he ran his thoughts outdistanced him, 

" Foo! that I was to have left the bridge!" choked he. 
" My first act when I set foot on solid land should have 
been to cut the ropes and drop the whole thing into the 
rapids! I might have known this would happen  fool that 
I was ! '' 

609 




6io DARKNESS AND DAWN 

The safety, the life, of the whole colony, including his 
wife and son, now depended solely on his reaching the 
southern end of the bridge before the vanguard of the 
Horde. 

With a heart-racking burst of energy he sprang to the 
defence, and as he ran he drew his hunting-knife. 

Reeling with exhaustion, spent, winded, yet still in desperation struggling onward, he won the top of the cliff, 
swung to the left along the path that led to the bridge, 
and  more dead than alive  rushed onward in a last, supreme effort. 

Already he saw the Anthropoids were within a hundred 
feet of the abutment. He could plainly see their squat, hideous bodies, their hairy and pendent arms, and the ugly 
shufllc of their preposterous legs, as at their best speed they 
made for the clifF. 

Three or four fwisoned darts fell clicking on the stones 
about him. Howls and yells of rage burst from the file 
of bcast-mcn. 

One of the horrible creatures even  with apelike agility 
 spr.ing u|) into the guy ropes of the bridge, clung there, 
arul discharged an arrow from its bamboo blow-gun, chattering with rage. 

Stern, running but the faster, plugged him with a fortyfour. The Anthropoid, still clinging, yowled hideously, 
then all at once dropped off and vanished in the depths. 

r\ill drive, Allan hurled himself toward the entrance of 
the bridge. It seemed to him the beasts were almost on 
him now. 

Plainly he could hear the slavering click of their tushes 
and see the red, bleared winking of their deep-set eyes. 

Now he was at the rope-anchorage, where the cables 
were lashed to two stout palms. 

He emptied his automatic point-blank into the pack. 

Pausing not to note effects, he slashed furiously at the 
left-hand rope. 



WAR! 6it 

One strand gave. It sprai apart and began untwisting. 
Again he hewed with mad rage. 

" Crack!" 

The cable parted with a report lilte a pistol-shot. From 
the bridge a wild, hideous tumult of yells and shrieks 
arose. The whole fabric, now unsupported on one side, 
dropped awry. Covered from end to end with Anthropoids, 
it swayed heavily. 

Had men been on it, all must have been flung into the 
rapids by the shock. But these beast-things, used to arboreal work, to scaling cHfFs, to every kind of dangerous 
adventuring, nearly all succeeded in clinging. 

Only three or four were shaken off, to catapult over and 
over down into the foaming lash of the river. 

And still, now creeping with hideous agility along the 
racked and swinging bridge that hung by but a single rope, 
they continued to make way, howling and screaming like 
damned souls. 

One gained the shore! At Allan it bounded, crouching, 
ferocious, deadly. He saw the tiny, venomous lance raised 
for the throw. 

'Flick.'
He felt a twitch on his arm. Was he wounded? He 
knew not. Only he knew that with blind rage he had flung 
himself on the second rope, and now with demon-rage was 
hacking at it desperately. 

The snapping whirl of the cable as it parted flung him 
backward. 

He had an instant's vision of the whole bridge-structure 
crumpling. Then it vanished. From the depths rose the 
most awful scream, quickly smothered, that he had ever 
heard. 

And as the bestial bodies went tumbling, rolling, fighting. 
down the rapids, he suddenly beheld the bridge footway 
hanging limp and swaying against the further cliff. 

" Thank God ! In time, in time I " he panted, staggering 
like a drunken man. 




6i2 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

But all at once he beheld two of the Horde still there in 
front of him  the one that had flung the dart and another. 
They were advancing at a lope. 

Allan turned and fled. 

His ammunition was all spent, he knew that to face 
them was madness. 

" I must load up again/' thought he. " Then I'll make 
short work of them ! " 

Fortunately he could far outstrip them in flight. That, 
and that alone, had already saved him in the past week of 
horrible pursuit through the forests to northward. And 
quickly now he ran down the terrace again  down to the 
caves below. As he ran he shouted in Merucaan : 

" Out, my people! Out with you! Out to battle! Out 
to zvar!" 

Half way down to Cliff Villa he met Frumuos toilii 
upward. Him he greeted and quickly informed of the 
situation. 

" The bridge is down ! " he panted. " I cut it ! The 
further shore is swarming with enemies. Two have 
reached this side ! " 

 What is this, O Kromno?" asked the man anxiously, 
pointing at Allan's shoulder. " Have they wounded you?" 

Allan looked and saw a poisoned dart hanging loosely 
in his left sleeve. As he moved he could feel the point 
rubbing against his naked skin. 

' Merciful Heaven ! " he exclaimed. " Has it scratched 
me?" 

With infinite precautions he loosened and threw off his 
outer garment. He flung it, with the dart still adherii% 
down over the cliff. 

 Look, Frumuos ! " he commanded. " Search carefully 
and see if there be any scratch on the skin!" 

The man obeyed, making a minute inspection through 
his mica eye-shields. Then he shook his head. 

" No, Kromno,' he answered. " I see nothing. But the 
arrow came near, near ! ' 



WAR! 613 

Stem, tremendously relieved, gestured toward the caves. 

" Go swiftly ! " he comraandcd. " Bring up every man 
who still can fight. All must have full burdens of cartridges. Even though the bridge be down, the enemy will 
still attack I " 

"But how, since the great river lies between?" 

" They can climb down those cliffs and swim the river 
and scramble up this side as easily as we can walk on level 
ground. Go swiftly ! There is no time to lose ! " 

' I go, master. But tell me, the two who have already 
readied this side shall we not first slay them ? " 

Allan thought. For the first time he now realized clearly 
the terrible peril that lay in these two Anthropoids already 
inside the limits of the colony. 

He peered up the pathway. No sign of them above. 
Their animal cunning had warned them not to descend to 
certain death. 

Now Allan knew they were at liberty inside the palisades, 
waiting, watching, constituting a deadly menace at every 
turn. 

In any one of a thousand places they could lie ambushed, 
behind trees or bushes, or in the limbs aloft, and thence, 
unseen, they could discharge an indefinite number of darts. 

It was now perilous in the extreme even to venture back 
to the palisade. Any moment might bring a flicking, stinging messenger of death. Those two, alone, might easily 
decimate the remaining men of the colony  and now each 
man was incalculably precious. 

" Go, Frumuos," Allan again commanded, " For the 
moment we must leave those two up there. Go, muster 
all the fighting men and bring them up here along the terrace. I must think! Go!" 

Suddenly, before the messenger had even had time to 
disappear round the first bend in the path, Allan found his 
inspiration. 

" Regular warfare will never do iti " he exclaimed decisively. " They have thousands where wc have tens. Be



6i4 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

fore we could pick them off with our firearms they'd 
have exhausted all our ammunition and have rushed us 
and everything would be all over. 

No; there must be some quicker and more drastic 
way ! Even dynamite or Pulverite could never reach them 
all, swarming over there through miles of forest. Only 
one thing can stand against them  fire! 

" With fire we must sweep and purge the world, even 
though we destroy it! With fire we m%ist sweep the 
2vorld!" 



CHAPTER XXVIII 



THE BESOM OF FLAME 



Stern was not long in carrying out his plan. 

Even before Frumuos had returned, with the seventeen 
men still able to bear arms, he was at work. 

In Cliff Villa he hastily lashed up half a dozen fireballs, 
of coarse cloth, thoroughly soaked them in oil, and, with 
a blazing torch, brought them out to the terrace. Old 
Gesafani, at his command, bolted the door behind him. At 
all hazards, Beta and the child must be protected from any 
possibility of peril. 

"Here. Frumuos!" cried Stem. 

" Yes, master?" 

' Rim quickly ! Fetcli the strongest bow in the colony 
and many arrows!" 

" I go, master! " 

Once more the man departed, running, 

"Gad! If I only had my oxygen-containing bullets 
ready! " tliought Stern, his mind reverting to an unfinished 
experiment down there in his laboratory in the Rapids 
power-house. "They would turn the trick, sure enough! 
They'd burst and rain fire everywhere. But they aren't 
ready yet ; and even if they were, nobody could venture 
down there now! " 

For already, plainly visible on the farther edge of the 
canon, scores and hundreds of the hideous little beast-men 
were beginning to swarm. Their cries, despite the contrary 
stiff wind, carried across the river; and here and there a 
dart broke against the cliff. 

615 i 




i 



6i6 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Already a few of the Anthropoids were banning to 
scramble down the opposite wall of stone. 

" Men ! " cried Allan commandingly, " not one of those 
creatures must ever reach this terrace! Take good aim. 
Waste no single shot. Every bullet must do its work ! " 

Choosing six of the best marksmen, he stationed them 
along the parapet with rifles. The firing began at once. 

Irregularly the shots barked from the line of sharpshooters; and the little stabs of smoke, drifting out across the 
river, blent in a thin blue haze. Every moment or two, 
one of the Horde would writhe, scream, fall or hang there 
twitching, to the cliff, with terrible, wild yells. 

Stern greeted the return of Frumuos with eagerness. 

" Here ! " he exclaimed, scattering the arrows among 
half a dozen men. " Bind these fireballs fast to the arrowheads ! " 

He dealt out cord. In a moment the task was done. 

'Sivad!'' he called a man by name. "You, the best 
bowman of all ! Here quickly ! " 

Even as Sivad fitted the first arrow to the string, and 
Stem was about to apply the torch, a rattling crash from 
above caused all to cringe and leap aside. 

Down, leaping, ricochetting, thundering, hurtled a great 
boulder, spurning the cliff-face with a tremendous uproar. 

It struck the parapet like a thirteen-inch shell,teiashed 
out two yards of wall, and vanished in the depths. And 
after it, sliding, rattling and bouncing down, followed a 
rain of pebbles, fragments and detritus. 

 Those two above  they're attacking!" shouted Stem. 
"Quick  after them! You, you, you!" 

He told off half a dozen men with rifles and revolvers. 

' Quick, before they can hide! Look out for their 
darts! Kill! Kill!" 

The detachment started up the path at a run, eager for 
the hunt. 

Stem set the flaring torch to the first fireball. It burst 
into bright flame. 



THEBESOMOFFLAME 617 

" Shoot, Sivad ! Shoot ! " he commanded. " Shoot high, 
shoot far. Plant your arrow there in the dry undergrowth 
where the wind whips the jungle! Shoot and fail not!" 

The stout bowman drew his arrow to the head, back, 
back till the flame licked his left hand. 

"Zhig-g-g-g-g!" 

The humming bowspring sang in harmony with the zooning arrow. A swift blue streak split the air, high above 
the river. In a quick trajectory it leaped. 

It vanished in the wind-swept forest. Almost before it 
harl disappeared. Sivad had snatched another flaming arrow 
and had planted it farther down stream. 

One by one, till all were gone, the marksman sowed the 
seed of conflagration. And all the while, from the rifles 
along the parapet, death went spitting at the forefront of 
invasion. 

Another boulder fell from aloft, this time working havoc ; 
for as one of the riflemen sprang to dodge, it struck a, 
shoulder of limestone, bounded, and took him fair on the 
back. 

His cry was smashed clean out; he and the stone, together, plumbed the depths. 

But, as though to echo it, shots began to clatter up above. 
Then all at once they ceased; and a cheer floated away 
across' the caiion. 

" They're done, those two up there, damn them I " shouted 
Stern, "And look, men, look I The fire takes I The 
wonds begin to burn!" 

Truet Already in three places, coils of greasy smoke 
were beginning to writhe upward, as the resinous, dry 
undergrowtii blossomed into red bouquets of flame. 

Now another fire burst out; then the two remaining ones. 
From six centers the conflagration was already swiftly 
spreading. 

Smoke-clouds began to drift downwind; and from the 
forest depths arose not only harsh cries from the panic


6i8 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

stricken Horde, but also beast and bird-calls as the startled 
fauna sought to flee this new, red terror. 

Shouts and cheers of triumph burst from the little band 
of defenders on the terrace as the sweeping wind, flailing the flame through the sun-dried underbrush, whirled 
it crackling aloft in a quick-leaping storm of fire. 

But Stern was silent as he watched the fierce and sudden 
onset of the conflagration. Between narrowed lids, as 
though calculating a grave problem, he observed the crazed 
Ijirds taking sudden flight, launching into air and whirling druiikenly hither and yon with harsh cries for their 
last brief bit of life. 

He listened to the animal calls in the forest and to the 
strange crashings of the underwood as the creatures broke 
cover and in vain sought safety. 

Mingled with these sounds were others  yells, shrieks, 
and gibberings  the tumult of the perishing Horde. 

Swiftly the fire spread to right and left, even as it ate 
northward from the river. 

The mass of Anthropoids inevitably found themselves 
trajji)ed; their slouching, awkward figures could here or 
there be seen in some clear space, running wildly. Then, 
with a gust of flame, that space, too, vanished, and all was 
one red glare. 

The riflemen, meanwhile, were steadily potting such of 
the little demons as still were crawling up or down the 
clifTside opposite. Surely, relentlessly, they shot the invaders down. And, even as Stern watched, the enemy 
melted and vanished before his eyes. 

Allan was thinking. 

' What may this not result in? " he wondered as he observed the swift and angry leap of the forest-fire to northward. " It may ravage thousands of square miles before 
rain puts an end to it. It may devastate the whole country. A change in the wind may even drive it back on us, 
across the river, sweeping all before it. This may mean 
ruin ! " 



THE BESOM OF FLAME 619 

He paused a moment, then said aloud : 

"Ruin, perhaps. Yes; but the alternative was death 1 
There was no other way 1 " 

Now none of the attackers remained save a few feebly 
twitching, writhing bodies caught on some protuberance of 
rock. Here, there, one of these fell, and like the rest was 
borne away down stream. 

Through the heated air already verberated a strange 
roar as the forest-fire leaped up the opposite hillside in one 
dear lick of incandescence. This roar hummed through 
the heavens and trembled over the long reaches of the 
river. 

The fire jumped a little valley and took the second 
hill, burning as clear as any furnace, with a swift onward, upward slant as the wind fanned it forward through 
the dry brush and among the crowded palms. 

Now and then, with a mufRed explosion, a sap-filled palm 
burst. Here, or yonder, some brighter flare showed where 
the fire had run at one clear ieap right to the fronded top of 
a fern-tree. 

Fire-brands and dry-kye, caught up by the swirl, spiralled 
through the thick air and fell far in advance of the main 
fire-army, each outpost colonizing into swift destruction. 

Already the nearer portion of the opposite cliff-edge 
was barren and smoking, swept clean of life as a broom 
might sweep an ant-hill. Tourbillons of dense smoke obscured the sky. 

The air flew thick with brands, live coals and flaring bits 
of bark, all whirling aloft on the breath of the firedemon. Showers of burning jewels were sown broadcast 
by the resistless wind. 

Stem, unspeakably saddened in spite of victory by this 
wholesale destruction of forest, fruit and game, turned 
away from the magnificent, the terrifying spectacle. 

He left his riflemen staring at it. amazed and awed to 
silence by the splendor of the flame-tempest, which they 
watched through their eye-shields in absolute astonishment. 




620 DARKNESS AND DAWN ! 

Back to Cliflf Villa he returned, his step heavy and his 
heart like lead. In a few brief hours, how great, how terrible, how devastating the changes that had come upon Settlement Cliffs ! 

Attack, destruction, pestilence and flame had all worked 
their will there; and many a dream, a plan, a hope now 
lay in ashes, even like those smoldering cinder-piles across 
the river  those pyres that marked the death-field of the 
hateful, venomous, inhuman Horde! 

Numb with exhaustion and emotions, he staggered up 
the path, knocked, and was admitted to his home by ths 
old nurse. 

He heard the crying of his son, vigorously protesting 
against some infant grievance, and his tired heart yearned 
with strong father-love. 

"A hard world, boy!" thought he. "A hard fight, all 
the way through. God grant, before you come to take the 
burden and the shock, I may have been able to lighten both 
for you ? " 

The old woman touched his arm. 

" O, master! Is the fighting past?" 

" It is past and done, Gesafam. That enemy, at least, 
will never come again! But tell me, what causes the boy 
to cry ? " 

" He is hungered, master. And I  I do not know the 
way to milk the strange animal ! " 

Despite his exhaustion, pain and dour forebodings, Allan 
had to smile a second. 

"That's one thing youVe got to learn, old mother!" he 
exclaimed. " Fll milk presently. But not just yet I" 

For first of all he must see Beatrice again. The boy 
must cry a bit, till he had seen her! 

To the bed he hastened, and beside it fell on his knees. 
His eager eyes devoured the girl's face; his trembling 
hand sought her brow. 

Then a glad cry broke from his lips. 

Her face no longer burned with fever, and her pulse 



THE BESOM OF FLAME 



621 



was slower now. A profuse and saving perspiration told 
him the crisis had been passed. 

"Thank God! Thank God!" he breathed from his inmost soul. In his arras he caught her. He drew her to 
his breast. 

And even in that hour of confusion and distress he knew 
the greatest joy of life was his. 



 



CHAPTER XXIX 

Allan's narrative 

The week that followed was one of terrible labor, vigil 
and responsibility for Stern. Not yet recovered from his 
wounds nor fully rested from his flight before the Hordenow forever happily wiped out  the man nevertheless 
plunged with untiring energy into the stupendous tasks 
before him. 

He was at once the life, the brain, the inspiration of 
the colony. Without him all must have perished. In 
the hollow of his hand he held them, every one; and he 
alone it was who wrought some measure of reconstruction in the smitten settlement. 

Once Beatrice was out of danger, he turned his attention to the others. He administered his treatment and 
regimen with a strong hand, and allowed no opposition. 
Under his direction a little cemetery grew in the palisade 
a mournful sight for this early stage in the reconstruction 
of the world. 

Here the Folk, according to their own custom, marked 
the graves with totem emblems as down in the Abyss, and 
at night they wailed and chanted there under the bright 
or misty moon ; and day by day the number of graves increased till more than twenty crowned the cliff. 

The two Anthropoids were not buried, however, but were 
thrown into the river from the place where they had been 
shot down while rolling rocks over the edge. They van
622 




ALLAN'S NARRATIVE 633 

sshed in a tumbling, eddying swirl, missluq>en and hideous 
to the last. 

With his accustomed eneigy he set his men to woric 
repairing the damage as well as possible, rearranging the 
living quarters, and bringing order out of chaos. Beta was 
now able to sit up a little. Allan decided she most have had 
a touch of brain-fever. 

But in his thankfulness at her recovery he took no great 
thought as to the nature of the disease. 

" Thank God, you're on the road to full recov ei y now, 
dear!" he said to her on the tenth day as they sat together in the sun before the home cave  A miity dose 
call for you  and for the boy, tool Without that good old 
goat what mightn't have happened ? Shell be a prhrikfed 
character for life in these diggings. 

Beta laughed, and with a thin hand stroked his hair as 
he bent over her. 

''Do you remember those funny goat-pictnres Powers 
used to draw, a thousand years ago? " she asked.  Wdl, 
he ought to be here now to make a sketch of you handing 
one to our kiddums? But  it was no joke, after all, was 
it ? It was life and death for him I  

He kissed her tenderly, and for a while they said ooCIh 
ing. Then he asked: 

You're really feeling mocfa mtich better to-day? 
Awfully much! Why, Vm neariy weQ again I In a 
day or two 111 be at work, just as thongfa nothing had h 
pened at all." 

" No, no ; you must rest a while. Just so you're bctto; 
that's enough for me.' 

Beatrice was really gaining fast The fever had at least 
left her with an insatiable appetite. 

Allan decided she was now well eoongfa wgun to nurse 
the baby. So he and the famous goat were mutually spared 
many a mauvais quart d'heure. 

Tallying up matters and things on the evening of t 



 



624 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

twelfth day, as they sat once more on the terrace in front of 
CliiT Villa, he inventoried the situation thus: 

I  Twenty-six of the Folk are dead. 

2  H'ycinba is disposed of  praise be I 

3  Forty still survive  twenty-eight men, nine women, 
three children. Of these forty, thirty-three are sound. 

4  The Pauillac is lost. 

5  The bridge is destroyed, and eight of the caves arc j 
gone. 1 

6  The entire forest area to the northward, as far as | 
the eye can reach, is totally devastated. 

7  The Horde is wiped out. 

" Some good items and some bad, you see, in this trial 
balance," he commented as he checked up the items. "It 
means a fresh start in some ways, and no end of work. 
But, after all, the damage isn't fatal, as it might easily 
have been. WeVe about a thousand times better off than 
tlicre was any hope for." 

' You haven't counted in your own wounds just healing, 
or the terrific time you had with the Horde," suggested 
Beatrice. " How in this world you ever got through I 
don't see.' 

 I don't either. It was a miracle, that's all. From the 
IL'ioe where I descended for a little repair work, and 
where tliey suddenly attacked us, to the colony, can't be 
less than one hundred and fifty miles. And such hills, valleys, junHes! Perfectly unimaginable difficulties. Beta! 
Now that I look back on it myself, I don't see how I ever 
got here." 

''They killed both the men you had with you?" 

" Yes ; but one of them not till the second day. Yoo 
see, the carbureter got clogged and wouldn't spray properly 
I realized I could never reach Settlement Cliffs withoot 
overhauling it. vSo I scouted for a likely place to land, 
far from any sign of the cursed signal-fires. 




ALLAN'S NARRATIVE 

il 

" Well, we hadn't been on the gronn fifteen i 
: before I'm blest if one of my men didn't hear the bntabk wood crackling to eastward. 

" ' O Kromno, master 1 ' said he, dutchii my ann, ' there 

come creatures tnany creatures  through the ionstl Let 

ns gol' 

a " I listened and heard it, too; and somdKnt-mbcoii
t sciously, I guess  I knew an advance-guard of the Horde 

yias on us! 
t " It was night, of course. My search-ligfat was still bnming, throwing a powerful white re into the thicket aboat B 
quarter-mile away, beyond the sand-barren where I had 
taken earth. I turned it oS, for I remembered how mndi 
better the Folk could see without artificial light in our nigfit 
atmosphere. 

" ' Tell me, do you see anything?  I whiq>ered. 

" The other fellow pointed. 

" ' There, there ! ' he exclaimed. ' Little people I Blany 
little people coming through the trees I ' 

" For a moment I was paralyzed. What to do? There 
was no time now for a getaway, even if the machine hadn't 
been out of order. My mind was in a whiri, a rout, an utter 
panic. I confess, Beatrice, for once I was scared absolutely blue  " 

" No wonder I Who could have helped being?" 

" Because you see, there was no way out Lord knew 
how many of the little fiends were closing in on us; they 
might be on all sides. The country was much bnAen and 
absolutely new to me. I had no defenses to fight from, 
and it was night. Could anything have been worse? " 

"Co on, dear! What next?" 

" Well, the Horde was coming on fast, and the darti 
beginning to patter in, so I saw we couldn't stay there. 
I had some vague idea of stratagem, I remember  some 
notion of leading the devils away on a loi duiC, ootdislnncing them and then swinging round to the "wTitng 



626 DARKNESS AND DAWN 






again by daylight, and possibly fixing it up in time to skip 
out for home. But  " 

" But it didn't work out that way?" 

" Hardly ! I emptied my automatics into the brown of 
the advancing pack, and then retreated, flanked by my two 
men. They were keen to fight, the Merucaans were 
always ready for a mix  but I knew too much about the j 
poisoned arrows to let 'em. We stumbled off through the j 
woods at a good gait, crashing away like elephants, while I 
always, apelike, creeping and hideous, the little hairy beastl)C(>ple stole and slithered among the palms/' 

Beatrice shuddered. 

 Heavens ! " she exclaimed. " I  Fd have died of sheer 
fright ! " 

" I didn't feel like dying of fright, but I infernally near 
(Hod of rage when in about five minutes I saw a flicker of 
flame through the jungle, and then a brighter glare." 

" Thev burned the Pauillac?" 

" I guess so. I never went back to see. They probaUy 
burned the planes, and tried to batter up the rest of it with 
rocks and things. They wrecked it all right enough, I 
guess. That was for the attack we made on 'em from its 
safe elevation at the bungalow. Well  " 

"What then?" 

" I can hardly remember. We trekked south, as near as 
I rould reckon it, or south by east, with New Hope Riveras 
our objective-joint. Oh, what's the use trying to tell it all? 
You know the jungle at night?" 
Wild beasts, you mean?" 

And snakes. Beta ! Some sensation to step on a cop" 
pcrhead and then leap off just in time to miss the snap 
of the fangs, eh? " 

"Oh, don't Allan! Don't!" 

"All right; I'll skip that part. Anyhow, wc hiked tiD 
daybreak, when my men began to complain of severe pain 
in the eyes. I had to stop and rig up some shields for 



ALLAN'S NARRATIVE 627 

them, and smear their hands and faces with mud to keep 
off the sun. Well, we managed to eat a little fruit and get 
a drink of water; but as for rest, there was none. For 
inside an hour, hanged if the darts didn't begin dropping 
again ! " 

" They'd come up with you ! " 

" Maybe. Or else it was another group of 'em. No 
telling. The whole country seemed to swarm with the 
devils. Anyhow, we had to mosey again. But  wellone of the darts got home on my best fighter. And  h-m I 
 he didn't last five minutes. He turned a kind of bluishgreen, too. And swelled a good bit. I'll spare you the 
details. Beta, At any rate, we liad to leave him. So there 
were only two of us now, and God knew where home was, 
or how many thousand of the hairy devils were lying in 
ambush on the way. So then  " 

" What did you do ? " she asked, shuddering. 

"We hiked, and kept on hiking! All day we beat and 
trampled through the forest, and toward night there was 
no more go in us. So we decided to make a stand. Pretty 
objects we were, too, torn and bruised, mired from swamps 
clear to our waists, and a mass of scratches and bruises I 
Well, we hadn't long to wait when the attack was on again. 

" 1 gave my one remaining man the spare automatic, and 
showed him how to handle it; and for about an hour wc 
stood off the devils. But they flanked us, and all at once 
my man grunted and pitched forward. I'm damned if 
they hadn't driven a spear clean through his lungs I 

" After that, good God! it was just a man-hunt, endless 
and horrible, through trackless wilds, over hills and mountains, through valleys, across rivers. Heaven knows where! 
But I always tried to keep my wits and beat to southward, hoping, ever hoping I might reach the New Hope. 
Wellnow and then I could get far enough ahead to snatch 
a bite or a drink. Twice I slept  twice, in about a week; 
think of that, will you? Once in a hollow tree, and once 




628 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

under a rock-ledge. Only a few hours in all. But it 
helped. Without that I couldn't have got through." 

She took his hand, and kissed and caressed it. 

" My Allan ! " she whispered, while in her eyes the tears 
started hot. " You suffered all that just to come home 
again ? " 

" What else was there to do? The last few days I hardly 
knew anything at all. It was a daze, a dream, a nightmare. There was so much pain in every part that no one 
part could hurt very much. The bushes pretty nearly 
stripped every rag of clothes off me  and the skin, as well 
My sandals went all to pieces. I lost my sense of direction 
a hundred times, and must have often doubled on ray 
tracks. I ate and drank what I could get, like an animal. 
Once, in a period of lucidity, I remember finding a nest of 
fledgling birds. I crunched them down alive, pin-feathers 
and all ! Well" 

" My boy! My poor, lost, tortured boy! " 

" When they wounded me I never even knew. All I 
know is that the spear wasn't one of the poisoned ones. 
Otherwise  " 

" There, there ! Don't think about it any more, darling! 
Don't tell me any more. I know enough. It's too awful! 
Let's both try to forget ! " 

'' I guess that's the best way, after all," he answered 
" I found the river somehow, after a thousand or two 
eternities. Instinct must have guided me, for I turned upstream in the right direction. And after that, all I remember is seeing the bridge across to Settlement Cliffs." 

"And so you came home to us again, darling?' 

" So I came home. Love led me, Beatrice. It was 
my chart and compass through the wilderness. Not even 
pain and hunger could confuse them. Nothing but death 
could e\'er blot them out ! " 

' And after all you'd been through, dear, you did what 
vou did for us? Without resting? Without delay or 
pite?" 




ALLAN'S NARRATI V  



629 

" That's life," he answered simply. "That's the prict o( 
the new world. He who would build must sufferl" 

Her arms embraced him, her breath was warm upon his 
face, and in the kiss that burned itself upon his eager lips 
he knew some measure of the sweetness of reward. 




CHAPTER XXX 

INTO THE FIRE-SWEPT WILDERNESS 

Less than three weeks after the extermination of the Horde, 
Stern had already completed important measures looking 
toward the rehabilitation of the colony. 

The damage had been largely repaired. Now only some 
half-dozen convalescent cases still remained on the sicklist. What the colony had lost in numbers it had gained 
in solidarity and a truer loyalty than ever before felt thcrt 

All the survivors, now vastly more faithful to the common cause than in the beginning, showed an eager longing 
to lay hold of the impending problems with Stem, and to 
labor faithfully for the future of the great undertaking. 

The fishing, hunting and domestication of wild aniniab 
all were resumed, and again the sound of hammers and 
anvils clanked through the caves. 

Under Stern's direction, half a dozen men crossed tie 
pools in boats, descended the north bank of the river, and 
got hold of the cut bridge cables. 

Stern shot a thin line over to them by means of a bow 
and arrow. With this they pulled a stouter cord across. 
and finally a strong cable. All hands together soon brouglit 
the bridge once more up the cliff, where it was lashed to 
its oUl moorings. 

])arring a few broken floor-planks, easily replaced, only 
sli.rht damage had been done. One day's labor sufficed to 
put it in repair again. 

The parapet was rebuilt and a wall constructed acroiS 
the end of the broken terrace. Work was bun oa new 

630 




THE FIRE-SWEPT WI LDERN ESS 631 

cave dwellii, with great care not to weaken the itnta 
and so invite another disaster. 

Stem, very wise by now in gauging the barbarian mentality, undertook no direct punishment of such as had 
been led away by H'yonba. But be gathered all the Folk 
together in the palisade, and there--close to the mutdjr 
eloquent object-lesson of the little cemetery  he made them 
a charwcg, a talk in their own speech. 

" My people! " cried he, erect and strong before them 
all, " listen now, for this thing ye must know t 

< " The evil of your hearts, thinking to prevail against me 
and the Law, hath brought ye misery and death 1 Ye have 
rebelled against the Law, and behold, many are now dead 
 innocent as well as guilty. The landslide smote ye, and 
enemies came enemies far more terrible than the dreaded 
Lanskaam ye fought in the Abjrss ! But a little more and 
ye had all died with battle and disaster. Only my hand 
alone saved ye  all who still live to breathe this upper air. 

" Men I Ye txheld my doing with the earthquake and 
the Horde! Ye beheld, too, my answer to H'yonba, the 
evil man, the rebel and traitor. Him ye saw huried, bleeding, from the parapet! That was my answer to his insolence! And if not he, then who can ever stand against 
me? " 

He paused, and swept them with his glance, letting the 
lesson sink deep home. Before him their eyes were lowered ; their heads twwcd ; and through them all ran murmurs of fear and supplication. 

 .\fy Folk ! Rightly might I be angered with you, and 
retnire sacrifice and still more blood; but I am merdfuL 
I sliall not punish; I shall only teach, and guide, and help I 
For my heart is your heart, and ye are prccwns io my 
eyes. 

" But, hark ye now, and think, and judge for younehrcti 
]i :i'iy ever Bpeak again of rebellion, or of trcasm, and 
seek to break the Law. on his head shall be the bk>od of aD. 
l-or liurcly woe shall come again on us. In your own be



632 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

half I warn you, and ye shall be the judges. Now answer 
me, O my Folk, what shall be done unto any who rebels?" 

 lie shall did" boomed the voice of Zangamon. The 
loyal fighter, now lean and gaunt with great labors, bm 
still powerful, raised his corded hand on high.  Of a 
truth, that man shall die!' 

" What death ? " cried Stern. 

"Even the death of Hyemba! Let him be cast from 
tlie parapet to death in the white rushing river far below!" 

All echoed the cry: ''Death to all traitors, from the 
rock ! " 

 So be it, then,' Stern concluded. " Ye have spoken, 
and it shall be written as a Law. From Execution Rod 
shall all conspirators be cast. Now go ! " 

lie dismissed them. While they departed and filed down 
the terraces to their own homes, he stood there with folded 
arms, watching them very gravely. The last one vanished 
lie nodded. | 

"They'll do now!" said he to himself. "No more 
troul)le from that source ! Another milestone passed along 
the road of self-control, self-government and communal 
si)irit. Ah, but the road's a long one yet  a long and hard 
and stony road to follow ! ' 

Next day Stern began making his plans for the recovery 
of the lost aeroplane. 

' I'll is is by far the most important matter now before 
the colony," he told Beatrice, watching her nurse the boy as 
they sat by the fire, while outside the rain. drummed over 
clilT and canon, hill and plain. "Our very life depends on 
keeping a free means of communication open with the 1 
mother-country of the Folk, so to call it, and with the city- ! 
ruins that supply us with so many necessary articles. No 
other form of transportation will do. At all hazards we 
must have an aeroplane  one at least, more later, if possible." 

"Of course," she answered; "but why not make one 
here? Down there in your workshop" 



THE FIRE-SWEPT WILDERNESS 633 

" I haven't the equipment yet." he interrupted ; " nor yet 
the necessary metal, the wire, a hundred things. All that 
will come in time when we get some mines to work and 
start a few blast-furnaces. But for the present, the best 
and quickest thing to do will be to look up the old machine 
again." 

" But," she objected, terrified at thought of losing him 
again: "but I thought you said the Horde wrecked it!" 

" So they did ; but beasts like that probably couldn't destroy the vital mechanism beyond possibility of repair. That 
is, not unless they heaped a lot of wood all over it, and 
heated it white-hot, which I don't think they had intelligence enough to do. In any event, what's left will serve 
me as a model, for another machine. I really think I'll have 
to have a try for it." 

"Oh, Allan! You aren't going to venture out into the 
wiltlerness again? " 

" Why not. dearest? You must remember the forest is 
all burned now; perhaps for hundreds of miles. And the 
Horde, the one greatest peril that has dogged us ever since 
those days in the tower, has been swept out with the besom 
of flame ! " 

" Which has also surely destroyed the machine, even 
if they haven't ! " she exclaimed, using every possible argument to discourage him. 

' I hardly think so," he judged. "You see, I left Jt in 
a wide sand-harren. I think, on the whole, it will pay me 
to make the expedition. Of course I shan't take less than 
a dozen men to help me bring it back what's left of it." 

" But Allan, can you find your way?" 

"I've got tol That machine must positively be recovered ! Otherwise we're totally cut off from the Abyss. Colonizing stops, and all kinds of hell may break loose hclow 
ground before I can build another machine entire. There 
are no railroads running now to the brink," he added smiling ; " and no elevators to the basement of the world. It's 
the old Pauillac again or nothing! " 




634 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

The girl exhausted all her arguments and entreaties in 
vain. Once Allan's mind was definitely made up along the 
line of duty, he went straight forward, though the heavens 
fell. 

Four days later the expedition set out. 

Allan had made adequate preparations in every way. 
He left a strong and well-armed guard to protect Settlement Cliffs. By careful thought and chart-drawing he 
was able to approximate the probable position of the machine. With him he took fifteen men, headed by Zanganion, who now insisted he was well enough to go, and ably 
seconded by Frumuos. 

Each man carried an automatic, and six had rifles. They 
bore an average of one hundred cartridges apiece, and in 
knapsacks of goat-leather, dried rations for a week. Each 
also carried fish hooks and a stout fiber line. 

The party counted on being able to supplement their supplies with trout, bass and pickerel from countless untouched streams. They might, too, come into wooded country, if the fire had left any to northward, and here they 
knew game would be plentiful. 

One thing seemed positive in that new world: starvation 
could not threaten. 

Cloudy and dull the morning was  yet well-suited to the 
needs of the Folk  when the expedition left Settlement 
Cliffs. The convoy, each man provided with eye-guards 
c'liui his hands and face well painted with protecting pigment, waited impatiently in the palisade, while Allan said 
farewell to Beta and the little chap. 

For a long moment he strained them both to his breast. 
tlion, the woman's kiss still hot upon his lips, ran quickly 
iij) the path and joined his picked troop of scouts. 

' Forward, men ! ' cried he, taking the lead with Zangaiiion. 

Some minutes later Beatrice saw them defiling over the 
lon. shakinjy bridge. 

Tlirongh lier tears she watched them, waving her hand 



THE FIRE-SWEPT WILDERNESS 635 

to Allan  even making the baby shake its little hand as 
well  and throwing kisses lo him, who returned them gaily. 

On the far bank the party halted a minute to shout a 
few last words to the assembled colonists that lined the parapet of the terrace. 

Then they turned, and, striking northwest, plunged boldly 
info the burned and blackened waste. 

Long after the marching column had disappeared over 
the crest of the second hill Beatrice still watched. Up 
on the cliff-top, with the powerful telescope at her eye, 
she followed the faint, drifting line of dust and ash that 
marked the line of march. 

Only when this, too, had disappeared, merged in the 
somber gray of the horizon, did she sadly and very slowly 
descend the path once more, back to the loneliness of a 
home where now no husband's presence greeted her. 

Though she tried to smile  tried to believe all would 
yet be well, old Gesafam, glancing up from her labors at 
the cooking- hearth, saw tears were shining in her beautiful 
gray ees. 

Barbarian though the ancient beldame was, she knew, 
she understood that after all, now as for all time, in every 
venture and in every task, the woman's portion was the 
harder one. 



CHAPTER XXXI 

A STRANGE APPARITION 

At a good round pace, where open going permitted, the 
party made way, striking boldly across country in the probable direction of the lost aeroplane. 

Some marched in silence, thoughtfully; others sang, as 
though setting out upon the Great Sunken Sea in fishingboats. But one common purpose and ambition thrilled them 
all. 

A man less boldly resourceful that Allan Stem must 
have thought long, and long hesitated, before thus plunging 
into a desolated and unknown territory on such a hunt. 

For, to speak truth, the finding of the needle in the haystack would have been as easy as any hope of ever locating the machine in all those thousands of square miles of 
devastation. 

But Stern felt no fear. The great need of the cobny 
made the expedition imperative; his supreme self -trust 
rendered it possible. 

From the very beginning of things, back there in the 
tower overlooking Madison Forest, he had never even admitted the possibility of failure in any undertaking. Defeat lay wholly outside his scheme of things. That it could 
ever be his portion simply never had occurred to him. 

As they progressed he carefully reviewed everything ifl 
his mind. Plans and equipment seemed perfectly adequate. 
In addition to the impedimenta already mentioned, a few 
necessary tools, a supply of cordage for transporting the 

636 



A STRANGE APPARITION 637 

machine, and three bottles of brandy for emergencies had 
been judiciously added to the men's burdens. 

Each, in addition, carried a small flat water-jug, tightly 
stopped, slung over his shoulder. Allan counted on streams 
being plentiful ; but he meant to look out evea for the 
unexpected, too. 

He had wisely taken means to protect their feet for the 
long tramp. In spite of all their opposition he had made 
them prepare and bind on sandals of goat's leather. Hitherto they had gone barefooted at Settlement Cliffs; but 
now that was no longer permissible. 

The total equipment of each man weighed not less than 
one hundred pounds, including tools and all. No weaklings 
like the men of the twentieth century, could have stood the 
gaff marching under such a load; but these huge fellows, 
muscular and lithe, walked off with it as though it had been 
a mere nothing, 

Allan himself bore an equal burden. In addition to arms 
and provisions he carried a powerful binocular, the spoil 
of a wrecked optician's shop in Cincinnati. 

Underfoot, as the column advanced in a long line, loose 
dust and wood-ashes rose in clouds. The air grew thick 
and irritating to the kmgs. 

Now and then they had to make a detour round a 
charred and fallen trunk, or cut their way and clamber 
through a calcined barricade of twisted limbs and branches. 
Not infrequently they saw burned bones of animals or of 
Anthropoids. 

Here and there they even stumbled on a distorted, halfconsumed body  a hideous reminder of the vanquished 
enemy  the half-man that had tried to pit itself against the 
whole-man, with inevitable annihilation as the only possible result. 

The distorted attitudes of some of these ghastly, incredibly ugly carcasses told with eloquence the terrified, vain 
flight of the Horde before the all-consuming storm of fire, 
the panic and the anguish of their extinction. 



/ 




638 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

But Allan only grunted or smiled grimly at sight of the 
horrible little bodies. Pity he felt no more than for a 
crushed and hideous copperhead. 

The country had been swept clean by the fire-broom. 
Not a living creature remained visible. Moles there stiil 
might be, and perhaps hares and foxes, woodchucks, groundhogs and a few such animals that by chance had taken 
earth ; but even of these there was no trace. Certainly all 
larger breeds had been destroyed. 

Where paradise-birds, macaws and paroquets had 
screamed and flitted, humming-birds darted with a whir 0: 
gauzy wings, serpents writhed, deer browsed, monkeys and 
apes swung chattering from the liana- festooned fern-trees. : 
now all was silence, charred ashes, dust  the universal.  
blank awfulness of death. t 

Naked and ugly the country stretched away, away to its | 
black horizon, ridge after ridge of rolling land stubbled with j 
sparse, limbless trunks and carpeted with cinders. i 

A dead world truly, it seemed  how infinitely different ! 
from the lush, green beauty of the territory south of the I 
New Hope, a region Stern still could make out as a bluish j 
blur, far to southward, through his binoculars. 

By night, after having eaten dinner beside a turbid, 
brackish pool, they had made more than twenty miles to 
northwestward. Stern thought scornfully of the distance. 
Ill his Pauillac he would have covered it easily in as many 
minutes. 

P>ut now all was different. Nothing remained save slow. 
laborious plodding, foot by foot, through the choking desolation of the burned world. 

They camped near a small stream for the night, and cast 
their lines, but took nothing. Stern gave this matter , 
no great weight. He thought, perhaps, it might be a mere 
accident, and still felt confident of finding fish elsewhere. 

Even the discovery of three or four dead perch, floating 
belly up, round and round in an eddy, gave him no clue to 
the total destruction of all life. He did not understand 



{ 



A STRANGE APPARITION 639 

even yet that the terrific conflagration, far more stupendous 
than any ever known in the old days, had even heated the 
streams and killed there the very fish themselves. 

Yet already a vague, half-sensed uneasiness had begun to 
creep over him not yet a definite presentiment of disaster, 
but rather a subconscious feeling that the odds against him 
were too great. 

And once a thought of Napoleon crossed his mind as he 
sat there silently, camped with his men ; and he remembered 
Moscow, with a strange, new apprehension. 

Next morning, having refilled their canteens, they set out 
again, still in the same direction. Stern often consulted 
his chart, to be sure they were proceeding in what he tocJt 
to be the proper course. 

The distance between Settlement Cliffs and the machine 
was wholly problematical; yet, once he should come within 
striking distance of tbe scene of his disaster, he felt positive 
of being able to recognize it. 

Not far to the south of ihe spot, he remembered, a very 
steep and noisy stream {lowed toward the east, and, off 
to northwest of it rose a peculiarly formed, double-peaked 
mountain, easily recognizable. 

The sand-barren itself, where he had been obliged to 
abandon the machine, lay in a kind of broad valley, flanked 
on one hand by cliffs, while the other sloped gradually upward to the foot-hills of the double mountain in question. 

" Once T get anywhere within twenty miles of it I'm all 
right," thought AUaji, anxiously sweeping the horizon with 
his binoculars as the party paused on a high ridge to rest. 
' The great problem is to locate that mountain. After that 
the rest will be easy." 

At noon they camped again, ate sparingly, and rested an 
hour. Here Allan brought his second map up to date. 
This map. a large sheet of parchment, served as a record of 
distances and directions traveled. 

Starting at Settlement Cliffs he had painstakingly entered 
on it every stage of Ihe journey, every ridge and valley, 




640 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

watercourse, camp and landmark. Once the goal reached, 
this record would prove invaluable in retracing their way. 

" If the rest of the trip were only indicated as well as 
what's past ! " he muttered, working out his position. " One 
of these days, when other things are attended to, we must 
have a geodetic survey, complete maps and plans, and 
accurate information about the whole topography of this 
altered continent. Some time  along with a few million 
other necessary things ! " 

The third day brought them nowhere. Still the brulc 
stretched on and on before them, though now, far to right, 
Allan occasionally could glimpse a wooded mountain-spur 
through the binoculars, as though the limits of the vast 
conflagration were in sight at least in one direction. 

But to left and ahead nothing still showed but devastated 
land. 

The character of the country, however, had begun to . 
change. The valleys had grown deeper and the ridges 
higher. Allan felt that they were now coming into a 
more mountainous region. 

" Well, that's encouraging, anyhow," he reflected, "Any 
time, now, I may sight the double-peaked mountain. It 
can't heave in sight any too soon to suit tne!' 

There was need of sighting it, indeed, for already the 
party had begun to suffer not a little. The perpetual tramping through ashes had started cracks and sores forming on 
the men's feet. Most of them were coughing and sneezing 
niiuh of the time, with a kind of influenza caused by the 
acrid and biting dust. 

The dried food, too, had started an intolerable thirst. 
and water was terribly scarce. The canteens were now 
almost always empty ; and more than one brook or pool, to  
which the men eagerly hastened, turned out to be saline or I 
lio[)elessly fouled by fallen forest wreckage, festering and 
green-slimed in the cooking sun. 

In spite of the eye-shields and pigments, some of the men 
were already suffering from sunburn and ophthalmia, which 



A STRANGE APPARITION 641 

greatly impaired their efficiency. Their failure to take fish 
was also beginning to dishearten them. 

Allan pondered the advisability of 80Spendin| day travel 
and trekking only by night, but had to give over this plan, 
for it would obviate all possibility of his sightii the landmark, the cleft mountain. Though he sai nothing, the 
pangs of apprehension were biting deep into his soul. 

For the first time that night the idea was strongly borne 
in upon him that, after all, this might be little better than 
a wild-goose chase, and that despite his desperate need 
of the Pauillac engine  perhaps the better part of valor 
might be discretion, retreat, return to Settlement Qiflh 
while there might still be time. 

Yet even the few hours of troubled sleep he got that 
night, camped in a blackened ravine, served to streqgClm 
his determination to push on again at all hazards. 

" It can't be far now ! " thought he. '' The place sinH 
ply cant be very far ! We must have made the best pait 
of the distance already. What madness to turn bade novr 
and lose all we've struggled so hard to gain I No noon we go again ! Forward to success ! " 

Next morning, therefore  the fourth since haviqf left 
New Mope River  the party pushed forward again. It 
was now a strange procession, limping and slotr, the men 
blinking through their shields, their hands mdA hem 
smeared with mud and ashes. 

Painfully, yet without a word of complaint or rAfSlioa, 
thev once more trailed over the fire-blasted hills on the 
quest of the wrecked Pauillac. 

Hour by hour they were now forced to panse for nst 
Some of the impedimenta had to be discarded. Dnriqg the 
forenoon Allan commanded that most of the 'fish iiyj f ea r 
and part of the cordage should be thrown away. 

Toward mid-afternoon he sorted out tiie foots, and htpt 
only an essential minimum. Now that thqr had teen 00 
possible need for ammunition, be deckled to leave hatt of 
that also. 




642 DARKNESS A NDDAWN 

-The tools and ammunition he carefully cached under 
rock-cairn and set a tall, burned pole up over it, with 
cross-piece lashed near the top. The position of this cai: 
he minutely noted on his map. Some day he would retu: 
and get the valuables again. 

Nothing could be spared from the provision packets, bi 
these were much lighter, anyhow. This helped a lilt! 
But Allan could see that the strength of his men, and h 
own force as well, was diminishing faster than the burdei 

So, wath a heavy heart, now half inclined to abandon tl: 
task and turn back, he sur\'eyed the horizon for the la: 
time that night in vain search for the landmark mountai 
of his hopes. 

Morning dawned again pitilessly hot and sun-parchec 
By five o'clock the party was under way, to make at leas 
a few miles before the greatest heat should set in. 

Allan realized that this must be the crucial day. Eithe 
by nightfall he must sight the mountain or he must tun 
back. And with fever-burning eagerness he urged hi 
limping men to greater speed, chafed at every delay, con 
stantly examined the horizon, and with consuming wratl 
cursed the Horde which in its venomous hate had brough 
this anguish and disaster on his people. 

Just a little past eight o'clock a cry suddenly burst fron 
Zangamon, who had left the line during a pause to look fo: 
water in a near-by hollow. 

Stern heard the man's hoarse voice unmistakably re 
sonant with terror. To him he ran. 

" What is it, Zangamon? '' he cried thickly, for his tongiit 
was parched and swollen.  What have you found 
Quick, tell me ! ' 

 See, O Kromno ! Behold ! " exclaimed the man, point 
ing. 

Stern looked  and saw a human body, charred and dis 
torted, face downward on the blackened earth. Up througi 
the back something projected  something hard and sharp 

He stooped, wide-eyed, staring at the thing. 



A STRANGE APPARITION 643 

" A spear-head, so help me ! "' 

Then he reahzed the truth. They had found one of his 
slaughtered companions of the terrible flight from the 
Horde ! 

Stern recoiled. Shocked though he was, yet a certain 
joy possessed him. For now he knew he could not be far 
from the path of success. The wrecked machine, he knew, 
could not lie more than one or two days' march ahead. If 
the party could only last that long  

The others came hobbling. When they, too, saw the 
mournful object and knew and understood, a deep silence 
fell upon them. In a circle they surrounded the corpse of 
their murdered comrade, and for a while they looked on it 
with woe. 

Allan realized that he must not let inaction, thought and 
fear prey on them, so he commanded immediate burial of 
the body. 

They therefore dug a shallow grave in the baked soil, 
and, taking good care not to touch the poisoned spear-head, 
carefully laid their companion to rest. Over the filled-in 
grave they heaved rocks. 

" Does anybody know his name ? " asked Allan. 

" He was called Relzang," answered Frumuos. " I knew 
him well  a metal-worker, of the best." 

" That's so  now I remember," assented Stern. " What 
was his totem?" 

"A circle, with a bird's head withiiL" 

" Let it be placed here, then." 

Their best stone-cutter roughly hewed the mark in a 
great boulder, which was set on top of the pile. Then, 
nothing more remaining to do, the exploring party once 
more pushed forward. 

But Allan could sense that now even its diminished 
strength had greatly lessened. Discouragement and forebodings of certain death were working among the men. 

He knew he could not hold them more than a few hours 
longer at the outside. 




644 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

During the noonday halt and rest, under a low diflf, he 
made a chanveg, saying: 

" O my people, barring the matter of the patriarchs 
death, I have always spoken truth to you. Now I speak 
truth. This shall be the last day. Ye have been brave and 
strong, uncomplaining in great trials, and obedient. I shall 
reward ye greatly. But I am wise. I will not drive ye too 
far. The end is at hand. 

" Either I see the cleft mountain by to-morrow night or 
we return. I shall push no farther forward than the march 
of one day and a half. After that I shall either have the 
flying boat or we shall go quickly to our safe home at Settlement Cliffs. 

" Be of good heart, therefore. The return will be mud 
easier and shorter. We can follow the picture of the way 
that I have made. Despair not. All shall be well. I have 
spoken/' 

They greeted his promise with murmurs of approbation, 
but made no answer, for body and soul were grievously 
tried. When he gave the order to advance again, howe\'cr, 
they buckled into the toil with a good heart. Their morali, 
he plainly saw, had been markedly improved by his few 
words. j 

And, now filled with hot, new hope, once more he led the ! 
painful march, his binoculars every few minutes swinging 
round the far horizon in a vain attempt to sight the longedfor height. 

But other events were destined and were written on the 
book of fate. For, as they topped a high ridge about fi 
o'clock that afternoon  dragging themselves along, parched 
and spent, rather than marching  Allan made a halt for 
careful observations from this vantage-post. 

The men sank down, eager to lie prone even for a few 
minutes on the ash-covered soil, to hide their eyes and 
pant like hard-run hunting dogs. 

Allan himself felt hardly the strength to remain upright; 
but he forced himself to stand there, and with a tremendous 



A STRANGE APPARITION 



645 



effort held the glass true as it slowly scoured the sky-line 
to north and west. 

All at once he uttered a choking cry. The glass shook 
in his wasted hands. His eyes, staring, refused their office, 
and a strange purple blur seemed to blot the horizon from 
his sight. 

With the binoculars he stared at a point N. N. W., where 
he had thought to see the incredible apparition; but now 
nothing appeared. 

" Halhicinalions, so soon?" he muttered, rubbing his 
eyes "Come, come, buck upi This won't do at all!" 

And again he searched the place with his powerful lenses. 

" My God ! but I do see them and they're real  they're 
moving, too ! " he exclaimed, " No hallucination, no mirage! They're there f But  but what  hat can this 
mean? Who can they be?" 

Tiny and clear against the dazzling background of the 
afternoon sky he had perceived a long line of human 
figures trekking to southeast over the distant hill-top, almost 
directly toward the point where his exhausted troop now 
Uy inert and panting. 




CHAPTER XXXII 

THE MEETING OF THE BANDS 

Convinced though Stern now was of the reality of tb 
amazing sight he had just witnessed through his binoculars, 
yet for a long moment he remained silent and staring, 
utterly at a loss for any rational explanation of the remarkable apparition. 

Exhausted in body and confused in mind, he could hit 
upon no answer to the riddle. 

Might these be some detached and belated members of 
the Horde ? No ; for their figures and their gait, as he now 
for the third time studied them through the glass, were 
unmistakably human. 

But if not Anthropoids, then what? Enemies? Poto 
tial friends ? Some new and strange race, until now undis-  
covered ? j 

A score of possible explanations struggled in his mini; 
only to be rejected. But this was now no time for qucs-; 
lions, analysis, or thought. For, even as he looked, the end; 
of the line came to view, then vanished down the blackcnec 
liillside. 

Invisible, now that they no longer stood silhouetted against 
the sky-line, the strange company had disappeared as though 
swallowed up by the earth. Yet Stem well knew that tbej 
were coming almost directly down upon him and hb lit 
party. Already there was pressing need for swift dco 
sion. 

What should he do? Advance to meet these strangers? 
Risk all on a mere chance? Or tum, retreat and tekOr ambush them, and kill? 

646 




THE MEETING OF THE BANDS 647 

He found himself, for the moment, unable to make up 
his mind. Yet, should a pinch arise and the last contingency become necessary, he felt a powerful advantage. He 
was positive his little band, armed as they were, could 
easily wipe out this column. But, after all, must he fight? 

His questions all unsettled and his mind confused from 
the terrible exhaustions of the march, he waited. He surveyed the neighborhood, with a view to possible battle. 

On his left rose a ridge that swung to northward between 
the advancing column and his own position. On his right 
an arroyo or gully, choked with fallen tree-trunks and 
burned forest wreckage, descended in an easterly direction 
toward a rather deep valley. In this gully he saw was 
ample hiding-place for his whole force. 

" Men ! " he addressed them ; 'Mt is strange to ttH, but 
there be others who come against us there I  He pointed 
at the far crest of the sawlike highlands, where now he 
thought to see a hazy, floating pall of dust. 

' Until we know their purpose and their temper we must 
have care. We must hide ourselves and wait Gmie, then 
quickly! And prepare your guns against the need of 
battle ! " 

His words aroused and heartened his exhausted men. 
The prospect even of war was welcome  anything in place 
of this unending trek through the burned wilderness. 

Zangamon cried : " Where be those that come O Krom 
no? And what manner of men?" 

" Yonder," indicated Stem. " I know not who, save 
that they be men. Wait but a little and you shall know. 
Now to the ravine ! " 

All got up, and with more energy than they had shown 
for some time, they trailed to the gully. Here they were 
soon well entrenched, with weapons ready. Stem now 
felt connrlent of the situation, however it migt turn. 

They waited. Some little talk trickled up and down t 
lino, hut for the most part the men kept quiet, watd 
eagerly. 




648 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

Now already the dust of the advancing column had 
grown unmistakably visible, drifting downwind in a thin 
haze that ever advanced more and more to the southeast, 
came nearer always, and rose higher in their view. 

" Be ready, men," cautioned Stern. ' In a few minutes, 
now, the foremost will pass over that blackened hilltop 
there ahead of us ! " 

Higher and thicker grew the dust. A far, shrill or 
sounded ; and some minutes later the breaking of wood became audible as the column cut through a charred barrier. 

Stern was half standing, half lying in the arroyo, only 
his head projecting over a charcoal mass that once had 
been a date-palm. 

His weapon hung, well balanced, in his hand. All along 
the edge of the gully other pistol and rifle barrels were 
poked through debris. Forgotten now were sore and 
wounded feet, thirst, hunger, ophthalmia, discouragement 
 everything. This new excitement had wiped all pain 
away. 

Suddenly Allan started, and a little nervous thrill ran 
down his spine. Over the top of the hill they all were  
watching a moving object had suddenly become visiblea head! 

Another followed, and then a third, and many more; 
and now the shoulders and the bodies had begun to show: 
and now the whole advance guard of the mysterious march-  
in column was plainly to be seen, not more than a quartermile away. 

Allan jerked the binoculars to his eyes, and for a long 
moment peered through them. 

His eyes widened. An expression of blank amazement. 
supreme wonder and vast incredulity overspread his fact 

''JlliatF" he exclaimed.  But it's impossible! I-i 
cant be  " 

Again he looked, and this time was forced to believe 
what seemed to him beyond all bounds of possibility. 

'' Our ozi'ii people! The Polk! " he cried in a loud voice. 



THE MEETING OF THE BANDS 649 

And before his men could sense it he was out of the 
ravine. 

His first thought was a relief expedition frcmi Settlement Qiffs; but how could there be so many? Those who 
had remained at the colony were only twenty-five, all told, 
and in this long line that still at a good pace was defiling 
down the hillside already more than fifty had come to view, 
with more and ever more still topping theorise. 

Utterly at a loss though he was, incapable of seeing any 
clue to the tremendous riddle, he still retained enough wit 
to hail the column, now passing down the slope some three 
or four hundred yards to westward. 

 Ohc, Merucaan v'yolku! " he shouted between hcrflowed palms. " Yomnu! Troin iska ieri!' 

Already his men had scrambled from concealment, and 
were waving hands and weapons, cloaks, burned brushwood, anything they could lay hands on, to attract attention. Their shouts and hails drowned out the master's. 

But the meaning of the words mattered little. For the 
column on the hillside, understanding, had stopped short 
in its tracks. 

Then suddenly, with yells, it dissolved into confusion of 
its component parts ; and at a run the People of the Abyss 
swanncd to the greeting of their kinsmen and their own, 
the colonists. 

Barbarians as the folk still were, they met with a vodf 
erous affection. A regular tcmgi, or joy-wailing, followed, 
and all crowded vociferously about Stem, with hafls of 
" Kromno! Long live our Kromno, our great chief I'' in 
their own speech. 

But Allan, dumfounded by this incredible happening, 
broke the ceremony as short as possible. The sght of 
these unexpected reenforcements dazed him. He managed 
to keep some coherence of thought, however, and Bwog 
rapid questions, to which he got scant answers. 

Amazed, he stared at the newcomers, now shouting with 
their relatives from the colony in wild abandon. To 1 




650 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

vast astonishment he saw that they had contrived eye-shields 
similar to those of his own party, and that they had lik 
wise painted their faces. 

They had siijplies as well  dried fish, seaweed, crated 
waterfowl, and even fresh game. Allan's astonishment 
knew no bounds. 

He laid a compelling hand on the shoulder of one, Rig\TiL 
whom he remembered as a mighty caster of the nets on the 
Great Sunken Sea. 

 Oh, Rigvin! ' he commanded. " Come aside with me. 
I must have speech at once ! " 

" I come, O Kromno. Speak, and I make answer!" 

' How came ye here without the flying boat? How did 
ye escape from the Abyss? Whither went ye? Tell me 
all ! " 

" \Vc waited, Kromno, but you came not. Did you forget your j)coi)le in the darkness?" 

" No, Rig\'in. There has been great distress in Settl 
nient Cliffs. The flying boat is lost. Even now we seek 
it. Enemies attacked. We destroyed them, but had to 
sweep the world with fire, as ye see. Many things have 
happened to keep me from my people. But how came ye 
here ? 1 low have ye done this strange thing, always deemed 
impossible? " 

" Harken, master, that I may tell it in few words! Later, 
when we reach the colony whereof you have spoken, we 
can make all things clear; but now is no time for a great 
talkinc." 

" Go on (juickly ! " 

 Yea, I speak. We waited for you many days, 
Kromno ; ])ut you came not again. Days on days we waited. 
as you measure time. Sleepings and wakings we waited 
ea.erly, Imt no sign of you was seen. Then uneasiness and 
fear and sorrow fell upon us all." 

" What then ? " 

 We held a great charweg there at the Place of Bones, 
near the Blazing Well, to take thought what was best to 



THE MEETING OF THE BANDS 651 

do. For you were our chief; and our very ancient law 
commands that if any chief be in distress, or deemed lost, 
the Folk must risk all, even life, to save and bring him once 
more to his own. 

" For many hours our wisest men spoke. Some declared 
you had deserted us, but them the Folk cried down; and 
barely they escaped the boiling vat. We agreed some 
calamity had befallen. Then we swore to go to rescue 
you 1 " 

"Ye did?" exclaimed Stem, much moved. "Gods, what 
devotion ! But  how did ye ever gel out of the Abyss ? 
How find your way so straight toward Settlement Oiffs? " 

" That is a strange story, and very long, O Kromno I 
All om- elders took thought of what ye had told us so 
often, and they made a picture of the way. We fashioned 
protections for the eyes and skin, as ye had said. 

" Then the wise men recalled all the ancient traditions, 
which we had long deemed myths. They looked, also, upon 
certain records graven in the rock beyond the walls, past 
the place of burial. They decided the way might still be 
open past the Great Vortex and through the long cleft. 
whereby our distant fathers came. 

' But they said it might mean death to try to pass the 
Vortex. They forced none to go. Only such as would 
need trj'." 

" A volunteer expedition, eh ? " thought Allan. " And 
look at the size of it, will you? These people are without 
even the slightest understanding of fear!" 

"Thus it was arranged, master," continued Rigvin. 
" Eight score and more of us offered to go. All things 
were quickly made ready, and much food was packed, and 
many weapons. In fifteen long canoes we started, after a 
great singing. Men went in each canoe to bring back the 
boats  " 

"They didn't evert wait for you? But if ye had been 
I lost, and sought to return, what then ? " 



6s2 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

" There was to be no return, master. All swore cither 
to find you or die ! '' 

" Go on ! " exclaimed Allan, deeply moved. 

" We sailed across the Sunken Sea, O Kromno, and 
reached the islands of the Lanskaarn. There we had lo 
fight and thirty were killed. But we kept on, and in two 
days, watching for the quiet time between the great tempests, entered the Vortex." 

" You all got through?" 

" No master. There was not time. Many were lost; 
but still we kept on. Then on the fourth day we reached 
the great cleft, even as our traditions said. And here we 
camped, and sang again, and once more swore to find you. 
Then the b9ats all returned, and we pushed forward, upward, through the cleft." 

" And then ? " 

Rigvin shook his head and sighed. 

" O Kromno," he answered, " the story is too long! Wc 
be weary, and would reach the place whereof ye have told 
us. Later there will be time for talk. But now we cannot 
tell it all ! " 

 Ye speak truth, Rigvin!" he exclaimed. "I, too. 
have many things to tell. It cannot be this day. Wc will 
lead ye to the colony. We, too, need rest My men are in 
sore straits, as ye see ! " 

He gestured at the groups gathered along the edge of the 
ravine. A great noise of talking rose against the heated 
air ; and food and water, too, were being given to the Settlement men by the newcomers. 

Stern knew the day was saved. Deep gratitude upwelled 
in his heart. 

 Nothing that I can ever do will repay men like these!" 
thought he. Then, all at once, a sudden hope thrilled him, 
and he cried : 

"Oh, Rigvin, one thing more! Tell me, in your long 
j'urnoy from the brink, have ye chanced to sec a cleft 
mcnr.Min vitli tv.o peaks on either hand?" 



I 



THE MEETING OF THE BANDS 653 

" You mean, master  " 

" A mountain ; a high jut of land, with two tops, side by 
side  like two grave-mounds?" 

Rigvin stood a moment in thought, bis soot-smeared brows 
wrinkled with the effort of trying to remember. Then all 
at once he looked up quickly with a smile, 

" Yea, master ! " he cried. " We saw such ! " 

"Where, where? For God's sake, where was it?" ejaculated Stem, gripping him by the arm with a hand that 
shook with sudden keen emotion. 

"Where was it, master? Thus one day's marching." 

Rigvin wheeled and pointed to northwestward. 

"And ye can find it again?" 

" Truly, yes. Why, master? " 

" There, near that mountain, lies the wreck of the vlyn 
b'hotu, the flying boat, Rigvin 1 Lead us thither! We 
must find it. And then Settlement Cliffs! " 

Through all his exhaustion and his pain he knew that 
now the goal was close at hand. And beyond toil, suffering and hardship once more beckoned protperity and 
peace and love. 





CHAPTER XXXIII 

FIVE YEARS LATER 

Long before daybreak that morning, the thriving 
of Settlement Cliffs, capital and market-town of tF 
Hope Colony, was awake and astir. 

For the great festival day was at hand, the fiftl 
versary of the founding of the colony, to be celebr; 
the arrival of the last Merucaans from the def 
the Abyss. 

The old caves, now abandoned save for grain, fr 
fish storehouses were closed and silent. No lah 
going forward there. The nets hung dry. From the 
smithies and work-shops along the river-bank at the 
arose no sounds of the accustomed industry. 

The road and bridge-builders were idle; and fn 
farms now dotting the rich bnile across the rivet 
snug stone house, tiled with red or green, standing 
its crops and growing orchards  the Folk were cor 
to town for the feast-day. 

The broad wooden trestle-bridge across the New 
echoed with hollow verberations beneath the mc 
tread of two and four-ox teams hauling creaking 
heaped high with meats, fruits, casks of cider, gc 
wines, and all the richness of that virgin soil. 

On the summer morning air rose laughter from the 
and maidens coming in afoot. Sounded the cries 
teamsters, the barking of dogs, the mingled mun 
speech  English speech again; and the fresh wind 
ing away a fine, golden dust from the long roads, 

6S4 



FIVE YEARS LATER 655 

the palm-tops and the fern-trees with a gentle and caressing touch. 

All up and down the broad, well-paved street of the village  a street lined with stone cottages, bordered with 
luxuriant tropic gardens, and branching into a dozen smaller 
thoroughfares  a happy throng was idling. 

Well clad in plain yet substantia! weaves from the vinefestooned work-shops below the cliff, abundantly fed, vigorous and strong, not one showed sickness or deformity, such 
as had scourged the human race in the old, evil days of 
long ago. 

Loose-belted garb, sandals and a complete absence of 
hats all had their part in this abounding health. Open-air 
life and rational food completed the work. 

No drugs, save three or four essential ones, and no 
poisons, ever had crept in to menace life. Wine there was, 
rich and unfermented; but the curse of alcohol existed not. 
And in the Law it was forever banned. 

On the broad porch of their home, a boulder-built cottage facing the broad plaza where palms shaded the graveled 
paths, and purple, yellow and scarlet blooms lured humming-birds and butterflies, stood Beatrice and Allan. 

Both were smiling in the clear June sunlight of that 
early morning. A cradle rocked by Gesafam  a little older 
and more bent, yet still hardy  gave glimpses of another 
olive-branch, this one a girl. 

The piazza was littered at its farthest end with serviceable, home-made playthings; but Allan, Junior, had no use 
for them to-day. Out there on the lawn of the plaza he 
was rolling and running with a troop of other children  
many, many children, indeed. 

As Beatrice and Allan watched the play they smiled; 

and through the man's arm crept the woman's hand, and 

with the confidence of perfect trust she leaned her head 

against his shoulder. 

I "Whoever could have thought," said he at last, "that 

I all this really could come true? In those dark hours when 



en 

r 




656 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

the Horde had all but swallowed us, when we fell into the 
Abyss, when those terrible adventures racked our souls 
down beside the Sunken Sea, and later, here, when everything seemed lost  who could have foreseen thisf' 

" You could and did ! " she answered. " From the beginning you planned everything, Allan. It was all foreseen 
and nothing ever stopped you, just as the future beyond this 
time is all foreseen by you and must and shall be as yoa 
plan it ! " 

" Shall be, with your help ! " he murmured, and silence 
came again. Together they watched the holiday crowd 
gradually congregating in the vast plaza where once the 
palisade had been. Now the old wooden stockade had 
long vanished. Cleared land and farms extended far beyond even Newport Heights, where the Pauillac had first 
come to earth at New Hope. 

Well-kept roads connected them all with the settlement 
And for some miles to southward the primeval forests had 
been vanquished by the ever-extending hand of this new, 
swiftly growing race. 

"With my help and theirs!" she rejoined presently. 
" Never forget, dear, how wonderfully they've taken hold, 
how they've labored, developed and grown in every way. 
You'd be surprised  really you would  if you came in contact with them as I do in the schools, to see the marvelous 
way they learn  old and young alike. It's a miracle, that's 
all ! " 

' No, not exactly," he explained. " It's atavism. These 
people of ours were really civilized in essence, despite all 
the overlying ages of barbarism. Civilization was latent 
in them, that's all. Just as all the children born here under 
normal conditions have reverted to pigmented skin and 
hair and eyes, so even the grown-ups have thrown back to 
civilization. Two or three years at the outside have put 
back the coloring matter in every newcomer's iris and epidermis. Just so  " 



FIVE YEARS LATER 657 

A sudden and quickly-growing tumult in the plaza and 
down the long, broad street interrupted him. He saw a 
waving of hands, a general craning of necks, a drill toward 
the north side of the square, the river side. 

The shouts and cheers increased and cries of " They 
come! They come.'" rose on the morning air. 

"Already?" exclaimed Allan in surprise. "These new 
machines certainly do surprise me with their speed and 
power. In the old days the Pauillac wouldn't liave been 
here before noon from the Abyss 1 " 

Together, Beatrice and he walked round the wide piazza 
to the rear of the bungalow. The home estate sloped gently 
down toward the cement and boulder wall edging the cliff. 
In its broad garden stood the stable, where half a dozen 
horses caught on the northern savannas and carefully 
tamed  disputed their master's favor with the touring car 
he had buih up from half a dozen partly ruined machines 
in Atlanta and other cities. 

Up the cliff stili roared the thunder of the rapids, to-day 
untamed by the many turbines and power-plants along the 
shore. But louder than the river rose the tumult of the 
rejoicing throng: "They come! They come!" 

"Where?" questioned Beta. "See them, boy?" 

"There! Look! How swift! My trained men can 
outfly me now  more luck to them ! " 

He pointed far to northwestward, over the wide and 
rolling sea of green, farm-dotted, that had sprung up with 
mar\'elous fecundity in the wake of the great fire. 

Looking now out over the very same country where, five 
years and a month before, she had strained her tear-blinded 
eyes for some sign of Allan's return, Beatrice suddenly 
beheld three high, swift little specks skimming up the heavens with incredible velocity. 

"Hurrah!" shouted Allan boyishly. "Here they come 
 the last of ray Folk ! " 






658 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

He ran to the corner of the piazza and on the tall staff 
that dominated the canon and the river-valley dipped the 
stars and stripes three times in signal of welcome. 

And already, ere the salute was done, the rushing planes 
had slipped full half the distance from the place where they 
had first been sighted. 

A messenger ran down the gravel driveway and saluted. 

' O Kromno ! ' he began. " Master" . 

" Master no longer ! " Allan interrupted. " Brother now, 
only ! " 

The lad stared, amazed. 
Well, what is it ? " smiled Allan. 
The Council of the Elders prays you to come to help 
greet the last-comers. And after that the feast ! " 

" I come ! " he answered. The lad bowed and vanished. 

'' They aren't going to let me out of it, after all," he 
sighed. " I'd so much rather let them run their own festival to-day. But no  they've got to ring me in, as usual! 
You'll come, too, of course ? " 

She nodded, and a moment later they were walking o\t: 
the fine lawn toward the plaza. 

On the far side, in a wide, open stretch that served the 
children sometimes as a playground, stood the great hangars 
of the community's air-fleet. Beyond them rose workshq)S. 
their machinery driven by electric power from the turbines 
at the rapids. 

]vcn as Allan and Beatrice passed through the cheering 
crowd, now drifting toward the hangars, a sound of music 
wafted down-wind  a little harsh at times, but still with 
promise of far better things to be. 

Many flags fluttered in the air, and even the rollicking 
children on the lawns paused to wonder as swift shadows 
cut across the park. 

On high was heard the droning hum of the propellers. It 
ceased, and in wide, sure, evenly balanced spirals the great 



FIVE YEARS LATER 659 

planes one by one slid down and took the earth as easily 
as a 11 sinks to rest upon the bosom of a quJet sea. 

"They do work well, my equilibrators ! " murmured Allan, unable to suppress a thrill of pride. "Simple, too; 
but, after all, how wonderfully effective 1" 

The crowd parted to let him through with Beatrice. Two 
minutes later he was clasping the hands of the last Folk 
e\-er to be brought from the strange, buried village under 
the cliff beside the Sunless Sea. 

He summoned Zangamon and Frumuos, together with 
Sivad and the three aviators. 

" Well done 1 " said he ; and that was all all. yet enough. 
Then, while the people cheered again and, crowding round, 
greeted their kinsfolk, he gave orders for the housing and 
the care of the travel-wearied newcomers. 

Through the summer air drifted slow smoke. Off on the 
edge of the grove that flanked the plaza to southward the 
crackling of new-built fires was heard. 

Allan turned to Beta with a smile. 

" Getting ready for the barbecue already ! " said he, 
" With that and the games and all, they ought to have 
enough to keep them busy for one day. Don't you think 
they'll have to let us go a while? There are still a few 
finishing touches to put to the new laws I'm going to hand 
the Council this afternoon for the Folk to hear. Yes, by all 
means, they'll have to let us go." 

Together they walked back to their bungalow amid its 
gardens of palm-growths, ferns and flowers. Here they 
stopped a moment to chat with some good friend, there 
to watch the children and  parentlike  make sure 
young Allan was safe and only normally dirty and grassstained. 

They gained their bmad piazza at length, turned, and 
for a while watched the busy, happy scene in the shaded 
street, the plaza and the playground. 

Then Beta sat down by the cradle  still in that same 1 



66o DARKNESS AND DAWN 

low chair Allan had built for her five years ago, a chair 
she had steadily refused to barter for a finer one. 

He drew up another beside her. From his pocket he 
drew a paper  the new laws  and for a minute studied it 
with bent brows. 

The soft wind stirred the woman's hair as she sal then 
half dreaming, her blue-gray eyes, a little moist, seeing 
far more than just what lay before them. On his head a 
shaft of sunlight fell, and had you looked you might have 
seen the crisp, black hair none too sparingly lined with gray 

But his gaze was strong and level and his smile the saiw 
as in bygone years, as with his left hand he pressed her 
and, with a look eloquent of many things, said: 

' Now, sweetheart, if you're quite ready  ? " 



CHAPTER XXXiy 

HISTOKY AND BOSES 

Allan sat writing in his library. Ten years had now 
slipped past since the last of the Folk had been brought to 
the surface and the ancient settlement in the bowels of the 
earth forever abandoned. Heavily sprinkled with gray, the 
man's hair showed the stress of time and labors incredible. 

Lines marked his face with the record of their characterbuilding, even as his rapid pen traced on white paper the 
all but completing history of the new world whereat he 
had been laboring so long. 

Through the open window, where the midsummer breeze 
swayed the silken curtains, drifted a hum from the long 
file of bee-hives in the garden. Farther away sounded the 
comfortable gossip of hens as they breasted their soft 
feathers into the dust-baths behind the stables. A dog 
barked. 

Came voices from without. Along the street growled 
a motor. laughter of children echoed from the playground. Allan ceased writing a moment, with a smile, and 
gazed about him as though waking from a dream. 

"Can this be true?" he murmured. "After having 
worked over the records of the earlier time they still seem 
the reality and this the dream I " 

On the garden-path sounded footfalls. Then the voice 
of Beatrice calling: 

" Come out, boy ! See my new roses  just opened this 
morning I " 

He got up and went to the window. She  matronly now 
66i 



662 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

and of ampler bosom, yet still very beautiful to look upac 
 was standing there by the rose-tree, scissors in haniL 

Allan, Junior, now a rugged, hardy-looking chap of nariy 
sixteen  tall, well built and with his father's peculiar aknness of bearing  was bending down a high branch for fab 
mother. 

Beyond, on the lawn, the ten-year-old daughter, Fraacet 
bad young Harold in charge, swinging him high tn a Hoot 
hammock under the apple-trees. 

" Can't you come out a minute, dear ? " asked Beatrict 
imploringly. " Let your work go for once I Surely lhe 
new roses are worth more than a hundred pages of drj 
statistics that nobody'U ever read, anyhow I " 

He laughed merrily, threw her a kiss, and answered: 

" Still a girl, I see! Ah, well, don't tempt me. Beta. It 
hard enough to work on such a day, anyhow, without yW 
tr>ing to entice me out I " 

"Won't you come, Allan?" 

" Just give me half an hour more and 111 call h < ftr 
to-day I " 

"All right; but make it a short half-hour, boyt" 

He returned to his desk. The library, like Ihe whole 
house now, was fully and beautifully furnished. The spoili 
of twenty cities had contributed to the adornment of "The 
Nest," as they bad christened their borne. 

In time Allan planned even to bring art-works fron 
Europe to grace tt still further. As yet he had not attemptd 
to cross the Atlantic, but in bis seaport near the nrirs o( 
Mobile a powerful one hundred and fifty-foot motm'-yxil 
was building. 

Tn less than six months he counted on making the fat 
voyage of discovery to the Old World. 

Contentedly he glanced around (he familiar roam. Uj 
on the mantel over the capacious fireplace stood wt vA 
beautiful bronzes. Priceless rugs adorned the poUdidl' 
floor. 

The broad windows admitted floods of sunlight that (d 




HISTORY AND ROSES 663 

across the great jars of flowers Beta always kept there for 
him and ligfhted up the heavy tiers of books in their mahogany cases. Books everywhere  under the window-seats, 
up the walls, even lining a deep alcove in the far comer. 
Books, hundreds upon hundreds, precious and cherished 
above all else. 

" Who ever would have thought, after all," murmured 
he, " that we'd find books intact as we did ? A miracle  
nothing less ! With our printing-plant already at work 
under the cliff, all the art, science and literature of the 
ages  all that's worth preserving  can be still kept for 
mankind. But if I hadn't happened to find a library of 
books in a New York bonded warehouse all cased up for 
transportation, the work of preservation would have been 
forever impossible! " 

He turned back to his history, and before writing again 
idly thumbed over a few pages of his voluminous manuscript. He read: 

" March i. A. D. 2930. The astronomical observatory 
on Round Top Hill, one mile south of Newport Heights, 
was finished to-day and the last of the apparatus fro-n 
Cambridge, Lick, and other ruins was installed. I find 
my data for reckoning time are unreliable, and have therefore assumed this date arbitrarily and readjusted the calendar accordingly, 

" Our Daily Messenger, circulating through the entire 
community and educating the people both in English and 
in scicntitic thought, will soon popularize the new date. 

" Just as I have substituted the metric system for the 
old-time chaotic hodge-podge we once used, so I shall substitute Rnglish for Merucaan definitely inside ,of a few 
years. .Mrcady the younger generation hardly understands 
the native Menicaan speech. It will eventually become a 
dead, historically interesting language, like all other former tongues. The catastrophe has rendered possible, as 
nothing else could have done, the realization of universal 
speech, labor-unit exchange values in place of money, and 



664 DARKNESS AND DAWN 



 



a political and economic democracy unhampered by idot 

of selfish, personal gain." j 

He turned a few pages, his face glowing wilh 
siasm. 

"April 15  The first ten-yearly census was 
to-day. Even with the aid of Frumuos and Zangamon, 
have been at work on this nearly two months, for now oar 
outlying farms, villages and settlements have ptishcd awjr 
fifteen or twenty miles from the orignal focus at the Qili 
or ' Cliffton,' as the capital is becoming generally knowiL 

" Population, 5,072, indicating a high birth-rate and > 
exceptionally low mortality. Our one greatest need is laijE 
families. With the whole world to reconquer, we inuit 
have men. 

" Area now under cultivation, under grazing and ondcr 
forests being actively exploited, 42,076 acres. Doaxstk 
animals, 26,011, Horses are already being replaced \lj 
motors, save for pleasure-riding. Power-plants and mansfacturing establishments, 32, Aerial fleet, 17 of the laift 
biplanes, 8 of the swifter monoplanes for scout work, Ctac 
shipyard at Mobile. 

" Total roads, macadamized and other, 832 miles. Airmotors and sun-motors in use or under construction. 41; 
mines being worked, 13; schools, 27, including the technical school at Intervale, UTider my persona! Instfuctioo. 
Military force, zero  praise be! Likewise jails, saloonv 
|}enitentiaries, gallows, hospitals, vagrants, prostitutes, politicians, diseases, beggars, charities  all zero, now and totver I " 

Allan turned to the unfinished end of the manuscript. 
poised his pen a moment, and then began writing axt 
more where he had left off when called by Bcairicc; 

" The great monument in memory of the patriarch, fim 
of all our people to perish in the upper world, waa finished 
on June 18, Memorial exercises will be held next month. 

" On June 22 the new salcllite. which passes daridy 
among the stars every forty-eight hours, was lumed Diat' 




HISTORY AND ROSES 665 

Its distance is 3,246 miles; dimensions, 720 miles by 432; 
weiglil, six and three-quarter btUion tons. 

" On July 2, I discovered unmistakable traces either of 
habitations or of their ruins on the new and till now unobscr\cd face of the moon, hidden in the old days. This 
problem still remains for further investigation. 

"July 4, our national holiday, a viva-voce election and 
Council of the Elders was held. They still insist on choosing me as Kromno. I weary of the task, and would gladly 
give it over to some younger man. 

" At this Council, held on the great meeting-ground beyond the hangars, 1 again and for the third time submitted 
the question of trjing to colonize from the races still in 
the Abyss. If feasible, this would rapidly add to our population. The Folk are now civilized to a point where they 
could rapidly assimilate outside slock. 

" In addition to the Lanskaarn, a strong and active race 
known to exist on the Central Island in the Sunken Sea, 
there remain persistent traditions of a strange, ycUowhaircd race somewhere on the western coasts of that sea, 
beyond the Great Vortex. Two parties exist among us. 

" The minority is anxious for exploration and conquest. 
The majority votes for peace and quiet growth. It may 
well be that the lnskaam and the other people never will 
be rescued. I, for one, cannot attempt it. I grow a little 
weary. But if the younger generation so decides, that 
must he their problem and their labor, like the rebuilding 
of the great cities and the reconquest of the entire continent 
from sea to sea. 

" In the mean time  " 

At the window appeared Beatrice. Smiling, she flung 
a yellow rose. It landed on Allan's desk, spilling its petals 
all across his manuscript. 

He looked up, startled. His frown became a smile. 

"My time's up?" he queried. "Why, I didn't know 
I'd lieen working five minutes!" 

"Up? Long agot Now, Allan, you just simply must 




666 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

leave that history and come out and see my roses, or 



or  



99 



" No threats ! " he implored with mock earnestness. " Fm 
coming, dearest. Just give me time  ' 

"Not another minute, do you hear? 

'  to put my work away, and I'm with you! " 

He carefully arranged the pages of his manuscript in 
order, while she stood waiting at the window, daring not 
leave lest he plunge back again into his absorbing toil. 

Into his desk-drawer he slid the precious record of the 
conimiinity's labor, growth, achievement, triumph. Then, 
with a boyish twinkle in his eyes, he left the library. 

She turned, expecting him to meet her by the broad 
piazza; but all at once he stole quietly round the other 
corner of the bungalow, his footsteps noiseless in the thick 
grass. 

Suddenly he seized her, unsuspecting, in his arms. 

" My prisoner! ' he laughed. " Roses? Here's the most 
beautiful one in our whole garden!" 

' Where?' she asked, not understanding. 

"This red one, here!" 

And full upon the mouth he kissed her in the leaf-shaded 
sunshine of that wondrous summer day. 



CHAPTER XXXV 

the afterglow 
Evening ! 

Far in the west, beyond the canon of the New Hope 
River  now a beautifully terraced park and pleasureground  the rolling hills, fertile and farm-covered, lay resting as the sun died in a glory of crimson, gold and green. 

The reflections of the passing day spread a purple haze 
through the palm and fern-tree aisles of the woodland. 
Only a slight breeze swayed the branches. Infinite in its 
serenity brooded a vast peace from the glowing sky. 

A few questing swallows shot here and there like arrows, 
blackly outlined with swift and crooked wing against the 
vermilion of the west. 

Over the countryside, the distant farms and hills, a thin 
and rosy vapor hovered, fading slowly as the sun sank 
lower still. 

Scarcely moved by the summer breeze, a few slow clouds 
drifted away  away to westward  gently and calmly as the 
first promises of night stole up the world. 

An arbor, bowered with wistarias and the waxen spikes 
of the new jleur de vie, stood near the woodbine-covered 
wall edging the cliff. Among its leaves the soft air rustled 
very lovingly. A scent of many blossoms hung over the 
perfumed evening. 

Upon the lawn one last, belated robin still lingered. 
Its mate called from a sycamore beyond the hedge, and 
with an answering note it rose and winged away; it vanished from the sight. 

Allan and Beatrice, watching it from the arbor, smiled; 
667 




668 DARKNESS 'AND DAWN 

and through the smile it seemed there might be still a trace 
of deeper thought. 

" How quickly it obeyed the call of love ! " said Allan 
musingly. " When thai comes what matters else ? " 

She nodded. 

 Yes," she answered presently. " That call is still supreme. Our Frances  " 

She paused, but her eyes sought the half-glimpsed outlines of another cottage there beyond the hedge. 

"We never realized, did we?" said Allan, voicing her 
thought. " It came so suddenly. But we haven't lost her, 
after all. And there are still the others, too. And when 
grandchildren come  " 

 That means a kind of youth all over again, doesn't it? 
Well" 

Her hand stole into his, and for a while they sat in 
silence, thinking the thoughts that " do sometime lie too 
deep for tears." 

The flaming red in the west had faded now to orange and 
dull umber. Higher in the sky yellows and greens ga\'C 
place to blue as deep as that in the JEgtam grottos. The 
zenith, a dark purple, began to show a silver twinkle here 
and there of stars. 

A whirring, roaring sound grew audible to eastward. It 
strengthened quickly. And all at once, far above the river, 
a long, swift train, its windows already lighted, sped with a 
smooth, rapid flight. 

Allan watched the monorail vanish beyond the huge 
north tower of the cable bridge, sink through the trees, 
and finally fade into the gathering gloom. 

' The Great Lakes Express," said he. " In the old days 
we thought seventy miles an hour something stupendous. 
Now two hundred is mere ordinary schedule-time. Yessomething has been accomplished even now. The greater 
time still to be  we can't hope to see it. 

" But we can catch a glimpse of what it shall be, here 
and there. We must be content to have built foundations. 



THE AFTERGLOW 669 

On them those who shall come in the future shall raise a 
fairer and a mightier world than any we have ever dreamed." 

Again he relapsed into silence; but his arm drew round 
Beatrice, and together they sat watching the age-old yet 
ever-new drama of the birth of night. 

Half heard, mingled with the eternal turmoil of the 
rapids, rose the far purring of the giant dynamos in the 
power-houses below the cliff. Here, there, lights began 
to gleam in the city ; and on the rolling farmlands to northward, too, little winking eyes of light opened one by one, 
each one a home. 

Suddenly the man spoke again. 

"More than a hundred thousand of us already!" he 
exulted. " Over a tenth of a million  and every year the 
growth is faster, ever faster, in swift progressions. A' 
hundred thousand English-speaking people. Beta; a civilization already, even in a material sense, superior to the old 
one thai was swept away; in a spiritual, moral sense, how 
vastly far ahead 1 

" A hundred thousand ! Some time, before long, it will 
be a million ; then two, five, twenty, a hundred, with no 
racial discords, no mutual antipathies, no barriers of name 
or blood ; but for the first time a universal race, all sound 
and pure, starting right, living right, striving toward a 
goal which even we cannot foresee I 

' Not only shall this land be filled, but Europe, Asia. 
Africa and all the islands of the Seven Seas shall know 
the hand of man again, and own his sovereignty, from 
pole to pole ! " 

His clasp about Beatrice tightened; she felt his heart 
beat strong with deep emotion as he spoke again: 

" Already the cities are beginning to arise from their 
ashes of a thousand oblivious years. Already a score of 
thriving colonies have scattered from the capital, all yet 
bound to it with monorail cables, with electric wires and 
with the ether-borne magic of the wireless. 

" Already our boy, our son  can you imagine him really 




670 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

a man of thirty, darling?  elected President on our last 
Council Day, guides a free people  a people self-reliant and 
strong, energetic, capable, dominant. 

" Already the inconceivable fertility of the earth is yielding its bounties a hundred fold; and trade-routes drde 
the ends of the great Abyss ; and all the vast territory once 
the United States has begun to open again before the magic 
touch of man ! 

"Of man  now free at last! No more slavery! No 
more the lash of hunger driving men to their tasks. No 
more greed and grasping; no lust of gold, no bitter cry 
of crushed and hopeless serfdom! No buying and selling 
for the lure of profit ; no speculating in the people's means 
of life; no squeezing of their blood for wealth! But free, 
strong labor, gladly done. The making of useful and beautiful things, Beatrice, and their exchange for human need 
and service  this, and the old dream of joy in righteous 
toil, this is the blessing of our world to-day! " 

He paused. A little, swift-moving light upon the far 
horizon drew his eye. It seemed a star, traveling among 
its sister stars that now already had begun to twinkle paldy 
in the darkening sky. But Allan knew its meaning. 

' Look! " cried he and pointed.  Look, Beatrice! The 
\Vest Coast Mail  the plane from southern California. 
The wireless told us it had started only three hours ago 
and here it is already ! " 

" And but for you," she murmured, " none of all this 
could ever possibly have been. Oh, Allan, remember that 
song  our song? In the days of our first love, there on 
the Hudson, remember how I sang to you: 

' Stark wie der Fels, 
Tief wie das Meer, 
Muss deine Liebe, 
Muss deine Liebe seinf" 

" I remember! And it has been so?" 

Her answer was to draw his hand up to her lips and 



THE AFTERGLOW 671 

print a kiss there, and as she laid her cheek upon it he 
felt it wet with tears. 

And night came ; and now the wind lay dead ; and upon 
the brooding earth, spangled with home-lights over hill and 
vale, the stars gazed calmly down. 

The steady, powerful droning of the power-plant rose, 
blent with the soothing murmur of the rapids and the river. 

"Seems like a lullaby doesn't it, dearest?" murmured 
Allan. " You know  it won't be long now before it's goodby and  good night." 

"I know," she answered, "We've lived, haven't we? 
Oh, Allan, no one ever lived, ever in all this world  lived 
as much as you and I have lived I Think of it all from 
the beginning till now. No one ever so much, so richly, 
so happily, so well I " 

" No one, darling 1 " 

" But, after toil, rest  rest is sweet, too. I shall be 
ready for it when it siunmons me. 1 shall go to it, content 
and brave and smiling. Only  " 

"Yes?" 

" Only this I pray, just this and nothing more  that I 
mayn't have to stay awake, alone, after  after you're sleeping. Allan t " 

A long time they sat tiether, silent, in the sweet-scented 
gloom within the flower-girt arbor, 

At last he spoke. 

" The wonder and the glory of it all ! " he whispered. 
" Oh, the wonder of a dream, a vision come to pass, before 
our eyes ! 

"For, see! Has not the prophecy come true? What 
was then only a yearning and a hope, is it not now reality? 
Is it not now all even as we dreamed so very, very long 
ago, there in our little biuigalow beside the broad, slowmoving Hudson? 

" Is this not true?" 

I see a world where thrones have crumbled ond where 

I 

672 DARKNESS AND DAWN 

kings are dust. The aristocracy of idleness has periskii 
from the earth, 

I see a world without a slave. Man at last is free. Nature's forces have by science been enslaved. Lightning and 
light, wind and wave, frost and flame, and all the secret, 
subtle powers of earth and air are the tireless toilers for 
the human race. 

I see a world at peace, adorned with every form of art, 
with music's myriad voices thrilled, while lips are rich 
with words of love and truth  a world in which no exile 
sighs, no prisoner mourns; a world on which the gibbets 
shadow does not fall; a world where labor reaps its fuU 
reward  where work and worth go hand in hand! 

I see a world without V:e beggar's outstretched palm, the 
miser's heartless, stony stare, the piteous ziraU of want, 
the livid lips of lies, the cruel eyes of scorn, 

I see a race zmthout disease of flesh or brain, shapely 
and fair, the married harmony of form and function; and, 
as I look, life lengthens, joy deepens, love canopies the 
earth  and over all, in the great dome, shines the eternal 
star of human hope! 



THE END 
